Ontario commits $16M to replace Quinte West water station
Mt. Pelion booster station is nearing end of useful life
QUINTE WEST – Ontario is granting Quinte West nearly $16.5 million toward the replacement of the city’s Mt. Pelion water-pumping booster station.
Bay of Quinte MPP Tyler Allsopp on Friday made the announcement in the council chamber at city hall.
Article content
The funds come from the health and safety water stream of the province’s $4-billion Municipal Housing Infrastructure Program.

“There’s an increasing demand here, with housing growth, a strong manufacturing base, and future expansion of CFB Trenton on the near horizon,” Allsopp said in a news conference. He spoke on behalf of Infrastructure Minister Todd McCarthy.

He recalled some of the city’s recent water woes: breakage of water mains, for example, have led to boil-water advisories and disruptions in service. Allsopp said fire-prevention work has also depleted reserves.

Allsopp and city public works director Matt Tracey said the need to replace the Mt. Pelion facility has since 2021 been in the city’s master plan.
“It became clear infrastructure and renewal (are) critical in Quinte West if we’re going to keep growing and delivering housing and economic activity, but that comes with a steep price for those paying for the system,” said Allsopp. He said the province’s funding stream is intended to ensure “an abundance of clean, accessible water” is available.

Allsopp said the $16.475-million investment is the government’s largest grant to date for the city.

“If he has a cheque, we’ll start today,” quipped Mayor Jim Harrison, who thanked Allsopp for the “significant amount of money.

“We’re very thankful.”

He said the city’s water systems ensure “we can still provide potable, quality water” even in the event of an issue at Canada’s largest air force base.
The Mt. Pelion station serves west-end Trenton, director Matt Tracey said, and the new elevated storage tank “will significantly increase water storage capacity for the entire Trenton water system.

“These improvements will better position the city to respond to fires and other environmental risks while continuing to provide reliable water service to approximately 14,000 homes” in that system, said Tracey. He added it will increase the system’s resilience and storage capacity.

A public meeting on the project occurred earlier in the week and the environmental assessment is nearly done, Tracey added in an interview. Given the city’s growth-related needs, he said, “it made sense” to build new infrastructure rather than put more money into the current station.
The project’s total cost is estimated to be $22.5 million.

“The balance will be funded from user rates and development charges,” Tracey said.

The city also has a $35-million trunk sewer project underway, and another big item in the master plan is upgrades to the Trenton wastewater treatment plant, Tracey said, adding the latter is the next high-priority project.

Municipalities shouting for infrastructure aid
Municipalities continue to advocate loudly for changes to provincial funding models, saying property taxes alone can’t cover their costs, especially those to replace old infrastructure.

“Municipalities are certainly struggling with the burden of infrastructure funding,” Allsopp said in an interview. “We know it’s one of the major barriers to getting houses built. And so we’ve really tried to take a look at it on a case-by-case basis and say, ‘OK, who really needs the funding?’”
Article content
Officials also consider the types of project and the funding streams to which municipalities apply. He said ministry staff praised Quinte West’s application and the city’s history of water-system failures showed its need.

Asked about the potential for changing funding models, Allsopp the government is “willing to be very innovative in how we approach this issue.”

Municipal Affairs and Housing Minister Rob Flack promotes the use of municipal service corporations.

“We’re looking at ways to maybe bring in private investment that then could be amortized over a longer period of time, to break down that cost for the end users and get infrastructure in the ground more quickly,” Allsopp said.

“We really do need a sort of a larger injection” of funds, he said, predicting more ideas may arise in the government’s spring session.
Mayor Harrison said the funding announced Friday is “fantastic.

“We can’t build houses if we can’t get rid of our wastewater,” he said after the news conference.

Harrison took no issue with the concept of public-private partnerships yet noted it can still lead to municipalities going into debt.

“It’s part of our revenue at one time, but on the other side, it’s another tax.”

“We’re a city with high debt,” he said while adding it has been worthwhile. The city has, relatively recently, built a new city hall, police station, and Trent Port Marina, and made changes to its shoreline.

Harrison said if such work were done today it “would cost us more than double than what we paid” at the time.

Government MPPs are on a blitz of cheque presentations for infrastructure projects. Hastings-Lennox and Addington MPP Ric Bresee on Friday announced $10 million in funding for Stirling-Rawdon, and funds for projects in other Hastings County municipalities are planned for the last week of January.