Smog cloud from the eastThick air over Germany
A thick blanket of smog hung over Dresden on Sunday. The Saxon city is particularly affected by emissions from Polish and Czech coal-fired power plants.
Berlin/Dresden – This is an ominous combination: cold weather plus an inversion! The smog cloud from the east is back and poisoning our air. Weather expert Karsten Brandt (52) warns that winds will continue to push polluted air into Germany for the next few weeks. And: The snowfall on Sunday will only provide a few days of relief at best. Because then the easterly winds will return.
It is plumes of pollutants from 14 Polish and ten Czech coal-fired power plants, as well as from tens of thousands of private coal-fired heating systems, that are polluting the air in Berlin, Dresden, and even as far as Hamburg.
he levels are alarmingly high in German metropolitan areas: In Berlin , the concentration of particulate matter (PM2.5) reached 140 micrograms per cubic meter on Sunday. More than half of the particulate matter in the air came from Poland over the weekend.
Numerous locations are currently exceeding the highest WHO warning level (PM2.5 daily guideline value) of 15 micrograms per cubic meter. Dresden: 123, Leipzig 152, Frankfurt an der Oder 153, Erfurt 150. In Dresden , 21 percent of the polluted air originated from Poland, another 21 percent from the Czech Republic, and eight percent each from Romania, Serbia, and Hungary. Even in Hamburg , the proportion of polluted air from Poland was 46 percent.
Adding to the enormous air pollution in the countries of the former Eastern Bloc is the treacherous weather situation: East and southeast winds have been pushing massive amounts of toxic air into Germany for several days now. Weather expert Brandt told BILD: "Due to the wind, two-thirds of the pollution comes via transport; we create one-third ourselves."
Added to this is the inversion weather pattern. It's warm above, cold below. The air mass boundaries act like a lid, preventing the polluted air from escaping. According to Brandt, the snowfall on Sunday will therefore only bring a few days of cooler air.
East winds will bring dirty air to Germany for the next few weeks.
Brandt: "East and southeast winds will return during the week, and they will continue to bring us a significant amount of polluted air. This will continue for the next few weeks, right into February." According to the weather expert, February is and will be the worst month for air quality, as the air is already polluted by the cold winter months.
But Germans themselves are also heavily polluting the air. In Frankfurt am Main, the proportion of pollutants originating from Germany is over 50 percent. This is partly due to thousands of private wood-burning stoves in the Taunus region.