Matosinhos beach at risk of no longer being a bathing area.
High pollution levels and public health risks could remove Matosinhos beach from the bathing areas. The APA is awaiting action.
The beach of Matosinhos, in the Porto district, is at risk of no longer being considered a bathing area, and immediate measures are expected from the City Council, revealed the president of the Portuguese Environment Agency (APA) this Sunday.
At issue are the high pollution levels and the risk to public health at one of the country's busiest beaches, which registers up to 14,000 users per day in the summer and which was closed 18 times during the last bathing season.
"It is one of the beaches for which we are currently waiting for a set of measures to minimize pollution. As is known, in the past it was the beach that had several pollution episodes which led to its closure. So, obviously, this year, in addition to the measures that have been passed, we have asked for more measures to assess the situation," said the president of the APA's board of directors.
In statements to the Lusa news agency, José Pimenta Machado said that the public consultation process will run until February 2nd and the final decision will be made in April. He confirmed that this is the only one of the 370 beaches in mainland Portugal with this risk.
“We will wait for the City Hall to do this work and we are naturally collaborating with the health authority. We hope they will bring measures to control and minimize the effect of pollution on Matosinhos beach,” added the official, revealing that a meeting with the socialist municipality led by Luísa Salgueiro is scheduled for next week.
“But if these measures are not sufficient, then it may be a beach that will no longer be a beach,” he stressed.
The Lusa news agency contacted the Matosinhos City Council, which referred inquiries to the APA (Portuguese Environment Agency).
Speaking to Lusa, José Pimenta Machado highlighted some of the measures underway, namely a project by the Faculty of Engineering of the University of Porto concerning the Riguinha stream, as well as one on Avenida D. Afonso Henriques which involves a sanitation intervention project scheduled for next month to minimize and eliminate illegal connections.
“We know that this stream greatly affects the quality of the beach. The city council has projects there, and also for the Real area, so we will wait for next week's meeting and evaluate them. We know that seagulls also have a significant impact,” described the president of the APA (Portuguese Environment Agency).
In an interview with RTP (Portuguese public television) on this topic, researcher Adriano Bordalo e Sá from the Abel Salazar Institute of Biomedical Sciences (ICBAS) revealed that the effects of bacteria caused by seagulls can include diarrhea and skin, eye, and ear problems in the most vulnerable individuals.
This researcher's team set up a seaside laboratory, collecting samples every 30 minutes over the last two summers, and confirmed the poor quality of the water and streams flowing into the beach, particularly those caused by 800 illegal connections from the Ribeira da Riguinha stream.