Thousands of flights cancelled as snow storm blankets half of US
British travellers stranded after states from Texas to New York brace for historic deep freeze
Thousands of Britons are facing travel chaos as a huge winter storm is forecast to blanket half the US with heavy snow and freezing rain.
At least 50 US flights from London Heathrow were cancelled on Sunday as states from Texas to New York braced for the deep freeze, according to tracking site FlightAware.
British Airways was the most affected UK airline with 41 flights to and from the US scrapped, leaving thousands of travellers stranded.
A source from the airline told The Telegraph that customers were being offered the option to rebook, move flights or take full refunds.
Meanwhile, Air France and Virgin Atlantic cancelled 21 and 12 of their flights to the US respectively.
More than 10,000 US flights were cancelled on Sunday, the most in a single day since the start of the pandemic, according to CBS news.
The American outlet also reported that more than 1,800 US flights had been cancelled for Monday.
On Sunday, Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, the closest to Washington DC, shared a picture of the approach to its main building covered in snow.
The airport’s X account posted: “Alert: airlines have cancelled all flights at the airport today.
“Check with your airline for confirmation and rebooking options. Please stay home and off the icy roads.”
FlightAware data later showed 99 per cent of flights scheduled to leave the airport on Sunday were cancelled, a total of 420.
Videos shared on social media appeared to show a thick layer of snow being cleared from runways at several New York airports, with later footage looking like a blizzard.
On Saturday, as many as one million people in America were left without power, with just over half the US population expected to be hit by heavy snow, the National Weather Service warned.
Roughly 330,000 homes across Tennessee, the hardest-hit state, were without power, and 300,000 across Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi, it added.
At least five people died in New York City, mayor Zohran Mamdani said, as temperatures plunged across the country.
The eastern two-thirds of America will be left “bitterly cold” on Monday with treacherous icy conditions, Allison Santorelli, a meteorologist, said.
“That means the ice and snow won’t melt as fast, which could hinder some efforts to restore power and other infrastructure,” she said.
Donald Trump vowed to “keep everyone safe” in the path of the “historic storm”, as he urged people to stay warm.
”We will continue to monitor and stay in touch with all States in the path of this storm. Stay Safe, and Stay Warm,” he wrote on Truth Social.
Seventeen states and the district of Columbia have declared weather emergencies, the department of homeland security (DHS) said.
Kristi Noem, DHS secretary, said: “It’s going to be very, very cold. So we’d encourage everybody to stock up on fuel, stock up on food, and we will get through this together.”
Ms Santorelli said it was a “unique storm” because it was so widespread and was being followed by freezing temperatures.
“It is affecting areas all the way from New Mexico, Texas, into New England, so we’re talking a 2,000-mile spread,” she said.
Passengers on flights to or from UK or EU airports have certain rights if a flight is cancelled. Airlines must offer full refunds or a seat on the soonest available alternative service, even if it is with a rival carrier.