Winter Storm Update: Hundreds Of Thousands Without Power, Most Flights Cancelled On A Single Day Since The Pandemic
It looks like the meteorologists were right.
Well, at least in most states.
Dozens of states have been hit by a winter storm, leaving hundreds of thousands of Americans without power.
The winter storm has also caused over 10,000 flights to be cancelled, the most on a single day since the COVID-19 pandemic began.
KOMO News had these details to report on the power outages:
The massive winter storm sprawling across the United States has stretched over 1,500 miles from the Southern Plains to the East Coast states.
Power outages across the nation have continued to climb as ice spreads and builds in parts of the South where it has been falling since yesterday.
Over 730,000 customers so far are without power across eight states in the storm’s path, according to poweroutage.us, with most outages hitting the Southern states of Tennessee, Texas and Mississippi.
After hitting the south on Saturday night, forecasters say the storm is expected to move into the Northeast, dumping about 1 to 2 feet of snow from Washington, DC through New York and Boston.
The storm has also set the stage for a brutal travel day on Sunday, with some of the nation’s busiest airports warning of widespread cancellations and delays.
CBS News provided these details on the flight cancellations:
Flight cancellations are continuing to mount today as the U.S. is being hit with dangerous winter weather from a storm moving across the country.
Airlines have canceled more than 10,00 U.S. flights for Sunday, according to the flight-tracking site FlightAware. That’s the most for a single day since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic and more the double the number of U.S. flights that were canceled for Saturday.
The National Weather Service says the storm is bringing widespread heavy snow, sleet and freezing rain from the Southern Rockies to New England through Monday.
“Extremely cold air will follow, prolonging dangerous travel and infrastructure impacts into next week,” it said on Sunday. “Severe thunderstorms may produce damaging gusts and tornadoes across the eastern Gulf Coast states Sunday morning and afternoon.”
More than 1,800 U.S. flights have already been canceled for Monday.