US Storm Leaves Over 1 Million Without Power, Nearly 11,000 Flights Canceled
The icy conditions are expected to linger in parts of the United States for several days.
NASHVILLE—More than 1 million Americans spent Jan. 25 in the dark as a severe winter storm shut off power across the South and prompted airlines to cancel nearly 11,000 U.S. flights.
The most affected airports were Charlotte Douglas International Airport in North Carolina, Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport in Atlanta, and all three of the New York area airports—LaGuardia Airport, Newark Liberty Airport, and John F Kennedy International Airport, according to flight tracker FlyAware.
American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, and Southwest Airlines had the most flights nixed, with each canceling more than 1,200 flights on Sunday alone. Delta Air Lines announced on Sunday it will operate a reduced flight schedule due to the frozen temperatures.
The weekend storm dumped snow and glazed powerlines with ice from the Southern Rocky Mountains and into New England.
As of 2:45 a.m. ET, more than 1,047,000, utility customers were without power in the United States, according to PowerOutage.com.
Tennessee had the most, with more than 336,000 power outages.
Nashville was the most impacted city in the state and the country, with more than 200,000 residents waking up to no power and thick layers of ice covering roads, sidewalks, and cars.
“The combination of freezing rain and ice has hit our community hard today,” Nashville Electric Service wrote on X Sunday.
“Weighted down by ice, trees are snapping and taking down power lines across the area.”
As of 2:45 p.m. ET, Mississippi had more than 174,000 outages as Louisiana experienced nearly 150,000 outages.
The Texas Department of Transportation urged drivers to stay off the road as their plows worked to remove the snow.
“An ode to travelers: STAY HOME! And if you can’t, STAY BACK!,” the Texas Department of Transportation wrote in an X post on Sunday morning.
Power started being restored in Texas but tens of thousands of people were still without lights.
Georgia, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Alabama had tens of thousands of people without power around Sunday afternoon.
President Donald Trump approved federal emergency disaster declarations on Saturday for South Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee, Georgia, North Carolina, Maryland, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Indiana, and West Virginia.