City air pollution set to spike 
Health warnings have been issued for Bangkok as PM2.5 levels are forecast to rise this week, prompting potential work-from-home arrangements to limit exposure, says Governor Chadchart Sittipunt. 
The Pollution Control Department (PCD) on Sunday warned residents in the capital and surrounding provinces to monitor air quality between Feb 1 and 4 due to the risk of accumulating fine particulate matter, said PCD director-general Pinsak Suraswadi. Stagnant atmospheric conditions could worsen pollution levels, particularly in downwind areas such as the central, northwestern and southwestern parts of Bangkok, he said. Similar conditions are expected in the North during this period.
Mr Chadchart said air pollution in the capital is expected to remain at the "orange" level, which may affect health, from Feb 1–3. He noted that unpredictable wind directions have prompted the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (BMA) to monitor pollution sources, including biomass burning, black-smoke vehicles and construction sites.
If pollution intensifies between Jan 31 and Feb 3, the BMA may request cooperation from businesses to allow staff to work from home to help reduce emissions, said the governor.
The PCD's Centre for Air Pollution Mitigation (CAPM) reported on Sunday that PM2.5 levels exceeded safety standards in 13 provinces, including Bangkok, Samut Sakhon, Chon Buri and Nong Khai. The highest level reached 62.1 microgrammes per cubic metre (µg/m³), well above the safety threshold of 37.5µg/m³.
Meanwhile, Thailand Consumer Council (TCC) deputy head of policy and innovation, Monrudee Phoin, said PM2.5 is no longer a seasonal issue but a chronic national problem.
Ms Monrudee urged the government to take proactive measures, including free protective equipment for vulnerable groups and remote learning policies. In the long term, she called for the urgent passage of the Clean Air Act to ensure public health protection. Around 10 million people sought treatment at public hospitals in 2025 for PM2.5-related illnesses.
