Province invests $10.8M in critical water infrastructure for Stirling-Rawdon
STIRLING-RAWDON – The Township of Stirling-Rawdon is receiving a major provincial investment to support the rehabilitation of critical municipal water sewer and road infrastructure.
The Ontario government is investing up to $10,871,798 to rehabilitate water infrastructure along Belleville Road, East Front Street, and North Street in the Village of Stirling, Lennox and Addington MPP Rick Bresee announced Wednesday.
The funding is provided through the Province of Ontario’s Municipal Housing Infrastructure Program – Health and Safety Water Stream (MHIP-HSWS). This program supports access to safe drinking water, housing development, job creation, and infrastructure resiliency in the face of extreme weather events. The MHIP-HSWS program provides a total provincial investment of $875 million and Stirling-Rawdon officials are extremely pleased to be successful in their application for this much needed infrastructure rehabilitation.
“I am very grateful to see this level of support from Premier Ford and the Ministry of Infrastructure for our small and rural communities,” said Bresee. “We all know the fiscal challenges of these municipal responsibilities, and I am thrilled to see the province supporting Stirling-Rawdon with this funding.”
The Stirling-Rawdon project represents a significant contribution toward a $15 million infrastructure initiative that will rehabilitate and modernize aging water infrastructure and support related wastewater and stormwater systems within the project area. The work will also improve road safety and ensure reliable municipal services for residents and businesses.
This investment will allow the Township to build on recent upgrades to its water and wastewater facilities by creating additional capacity to support approved and construction-ready housing development, helping to accommodate future growth while maintaining public health and safety standards.
Article content
Stirling-Rawdon Mayor Bob Mullin expressed appreciation to the Province of Ontario and the Ministry of Infrastructure for their support, noting that the funding enables the Township to proceed with essential infrastructure improvements while reducing the financial burden on local taxpayers and ensuring long-term service reliability.
“On behalf of Council and the residents of the Township of Stirling-Rawdon, I want to thank the Province of Ontario and the Ministry of Infrastructure for this significant investment of $10.8 million toward a critical $15 million infrastructure project,” said Mullin. “The rehabilitation and reconstruction of Belleville Road, East Front Street, and North Street will modernize aging water, wastewater, and stormwater infrastructure, improve road safety, and support the long-term sustainability of our community. Just as importantly, these upgrades will maximize the enhancements the Township has already made to its water and wastewater facilities, creating the capacity needed to support future housing growth and development which is approved and ready to be built. This provincial funding allows the Township to move forward with essential infrastructure improvements while reducing the financial impact on local taxpayers and ensuring reliable services for residents and businesses for decades to come.”
Article content
“As we continue to navigate economic uncertainty and unwarranted U.S. tariffs, our government is protecting Ontario by investing in critical infrastructure that drives growth, creates jobs and strengthens communities,” said Todd McCarthy, Acting Minister of Infrastructure. “Through our historic $4 billion Municipal Housing Infrastructure Program, we are giving municipalities and First Nations the tools they need to get shovels in the ground and build stronger communities. Our investments will deliver more homes, modernize aging water systems and lay the foundation for long-term prosperity across Ontario.”
Detailed design work on the project will commence in 2026. Public information sessions will be held once more detail becomes available on the project.