BRACE FOR IMPACT Storm Chandra weather alert update as ENTIRE country under Met Eireann warning amid 120kph winds, floods & snow fears
A NEW storm is set to make landfall in Ireland, with heavy rain, possible snow, winds of up to 120kph and “highly likely” flooding on the cards.

Storm Chandra has officially been named by the UK Met Office, with all counties across the country slapped with rain and wind warnings before it makes landfall in the early hours of tomorrow morning.
ts effects will be felt especially strongly in the north-east and into the south-east of the country, with weather experts warning of wind speeds reaching 120kph and the potential for flooding.

Cathal Nolan from Ireland’s Weather Channel said: “Storm Chandra has just been named by the UK Met Office with damaging winds of 120kph forecast for the north-east and also into the south-east of the country,

“This will be accompanied by up to 100mm of rainfall over mountain areas of the east and north-east also, with flooding highly likely.

“Occurring between the hours of 2am through until 9pm tomorrow night, high-level weather warnings have been issued by the Met Office, with further updated warnings likely from Met Éireann shortly.”
A Status Yellow rain warning is currently in effect for Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Tyrone and Derry, with the warning in place until midnight tonight.

Carlow, Kilkenny, Louth, Wexford, Wicklow, and Waterford are under a Status Yellow rain alert from midnight tonight until 11pm tomorrow.

Met Eireann said: “Bands of rain associated with Storm Chandra will be heavy and persistent. Rain falling on already saturated ground will lead to localised flooding, river flooding and difficult travel conditions.”

Likewise, a Status Yellow wind warning is kicking into place the entire country at 3am tomorrow.

Experts warn that “winds associated with Storm Chandra will be very strong and gusty, particularly along coasts and in exposed areas”.
The alert will be in effect until 11pm tomorrow night.

An orange wind warning is in place for Antrim, Down, and Derry, with “strong winds, leading to the potential for damage and disruption on Tuesday”.

These warnings will be in effect from 5am tomorrow morning until 9pm on Tuesday night.
FLOOD FEARS

A 24-hour Status Yellow Wind and Rain Warning is in place for Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Tyrone and Derry from midnight tonight.

The UK Met Office said: “Heavy rain and strong winds from Storm Chandra on Tuesday may lead to some flooding and disruption.”

Weather boffin Nolan said the rain will continue in the east for a time tonight, before “intensifying” through the morning ahead of the development of a very deep area of low pressure.

And some counties could even see snowfall as a result of the conditions.

He explained: “We have a low-pressure system that’s undergoing rapid cyclogenesis, deepening by more than 24 millibars within a 24-hour period.

“That is likely to bring storm force winds to places accompanied by very heavy falls of rain and with that, strong onshore winds leading to a combination of multi-hazard weather events with even a risk of wintry precipitation over the hills and mountains in Ulster and Connacht.”

POWER CUTS POSSIBLE

And now, homeowners are being urged to take a number of precautions to prepare for possible storm damage and power cuts.

To prevent wind damage, experts at Gallagher Insurance are advising homeowners to trim back large trees, secure windows, roofs and garden furniture, park vehicles safely, anchor trampolines, check for loose branches near power lines and keep an emergency kit ready ahead of the storm.

To help prevent flood damage, homeowners are also advised to clear their gutters and drains, use flood barriers where necessary, move valuables to higher floors, avoid parking in flood-prone areas, know how to shut off utilities and stay informed through official flood-warning websites.

Geraldine Kelly, Head of Personal Lines at Gallagher said: “The ferocity of recent storms means that power cuts have become all too common an occurrence in Ireland when bad weather hits,

“With many homeowners enduring considerable hardship as a result. For example, hundreds of thousands of customers lost power when Storm Eowyn hit in January 2025.

“And in the recent Storm Bram, 54,000 customers lost power at the peak of the outages.