Ministry of infrastructure announces over $23 million for new water tower
Opposition critic says application-based funding lacks transparency
Today, MPP George Pirie announced the Ontario government is investing up to $23,644,439 for the construction of the Tisdale Water Tower in Timmins.
The new 58-metre tower is being built at 4517 Gold Mine Rd (locally known as “the Back Road”). The total project cost is over $26 million and the balance will be paid out of the city’s water and wastewater budget.
The project will be phased in over the next three years.

The tower will hold 10 million litres. It would replace a 6.8 million litre in-ground reservoir on Langmuir Road filled via two trunk water mains from the Timmins Water Filtration Plant.

In June, 2025, council awarded the contract to Landmark Structures in Burlington, the sole bidder on the project and the only one in North America capable of completing it, according to Scott Tam, the city’s director of growth and infrastructure.

When Tam brought the contract to council for approval, he explained one reason the site was chosen because of its existing pressure reducing valve chamber, which lowers high incoming water pressure from the city mains to provide functional pressure for distribution of safe drinking water to homes.
The aim is to prepare for future growth in the South Porcupine community.

According to the most recent Ministry of Finance growth forecast, Timmins population is expected to increase by 3,600 over the next 30 years, an annual growth rate of 0.3 per cent.

International immigration is cited as a key driver of population growth.

The funding announced Monday comes from the province’s municipal housing infrastructure program’s health and safety water stream which has increased by $700 million for a total of $875 million to support access to safe drinking water, housing, job creation and protection for communities in the event of extreme weather events.

“Investing in water infrastructure is directly linked with enabling development and building the foundation for growth in the north,” said George Pirie, member of provincial parliament for Timmins.
“The Tisdale Water Tower is a critical project that will support new housing, economic expansion, and long-term prosperity for Timmins,” Pirie said in a statement.

Timmins Mayor Michelle Boileau said the investment in Timmins’ core infrastructure is essential to meeting the community’s future needs. 

“By strengthening our water system, we will be able to deliver reliable service, reduce energy use through smart design, and ensure the city is housing-ready to support the people and the jobs that drive our economy,” she said.

The funding is part of a $4 billion provincial commitment in the municipal housing infrastructure program, included in Ontario’s $220 billion capital plan to build transit, highways, hospitals, schools and water infrastructure that enables new housing.
“As we continue to navigate economic uncertainty and unwarranted U.S. tariffs, our government is protecting Ontario by investing in critical infrastructure that drives growth, creates jobs and strengthens communities,” said Todd McCarthy, acting minister of infrastructure, in a statement.

McCarthy added the goal is to build more homes and modernize aging water systems to support long-term prosperity across the province.

In August 2025, Ontario increased the municipal housing infrastructure program to $4 billion to speed up construction of homes and core infrastructure, such as roads and water systems.

Since its launch in 2024, the government says the program has made about 800,000 more new homes possible.
Ontario’s NDP Opposition critic for infrastructure says, while the investment announced Monday for Timmins is welcome, municipalities would benefit from a more open and transparent application system.

“With application-based funding, you have winners and losers, and the government keeps it pretty close to the vest—they choose who wins, regardless of the merit,” Jennifer K. French told The Daily Press on Monday.

The NDP has been calling for formula-based funding that is more predictable for municipalities so they can plan for essential infrastructure.

“It’s really hard for municipalities, especially northern and rural, to keep up with infrastructure costs with so much provincial downloading through the years, we really need a new deal for municipalities,” said French, who is also the MPP for Oshawa.
French said the full list of successful applicants for the municipal housing infrastructure program’s health and safety water stream has not been publicly shared.

“They can maximize those announcements, it’s very political. There are a lot of communities that met the criteria, put in expensive applications, hiring consultants—especially small towns that might not have a huge planning department or engineers on staff—and when they are not successful they may never know why,” she said.

She added if municipalities knew there was a dollar amount they could count on, they could decide what to spend it on, whether it be bridges or a water tower.

“I hope Timmins and other communities in the north and across rural Ontario don’t have to beg so hard for infrastructure dollars, because we really do need the north to be that engine that it is,” she said.

The municipal housing infrastructure program is made up of four funding streams: the housing-enabling water systems fund, the housing-enabling core servicing stream, the health and safety water stream and the agriculture and irrigation stream.

In January 2025, Ontario announced an initial investment of $175 million to launch the health and safety water stream.