An activist spends 72 hours straight hugging a tree and shatters the Guinness World Record.
Kenyan environmental activist Truphena Muthoni has set a new Guinness World Record for the longest time hugging a tree, with 72 consecutive hours. The record was first set in 2014 by Faith Patricia Ariokot of Uganda with a time of 16 hours and 6 seconds.
Abdul Hakim Awal (Ghana) broke it in 2024 with 24 hours 21 minutes 4 seconds, and Truphena first appeared in February 2025 to take the title with a total of 48 hours.

Frederick Boakye (Ghana) held the record for a very short time with a time of 50 h 2 min 28 s, before Truphena regained it with his record time.

"I realized that the world needed more than symbolism ; it needed perseverance, consistency, and proof that caring for the planet is not a passing fad. Doing it twice was my way of demonstrating that climate action is not a one-off event, but a sustained responsibility," Muthoni explained to the Guinness World Records website .
To prepare for the first time, she undertook a dry fast and reduced her water intake to train her body to endure long periods without it.

“However, I later realized that this approach was a mistake,” she said, “as it put unnecessary strain on my kidneys and increased the risk of serious health complications.”

“I also overdid my physical preparation during my first attempt by doing strenuous exercises driven more by nerves than strategy. For my second attempt, my preparation was very different. I significantly increased my water intake in the weeks leading up to the challenge to condition my body and protect my organs, and I prepared with calm, relaxation, and confidence,” the award winner explained to the Guinness World Records website .
"This made a remarkable difference; I didn't tire at all during the attempt. The main challenge I experienced was drowsiness, largely because I didn't sleep well the night before starting the record attempt. Overall, the experience taught me that endurance isn't about deprivation or intensity, but about preparation, balance, and respecting the body's limits," he stated.

Truphena was entitled to five minutes of rest for every hour of work. It was up to her whether to take a break every hour or save them for a longer break.

Through her attempts to break records, Truphena hopes to spread the message around the world that “healing the planet does not require violence, conflict or fear.”

“It can begin with affection,” she said. “Hugging a tree shows that nature is not separate from us; it is family. If one person can stay connected for 72 hours, humanity can surely learn to protect what still sustains us.”