James O'Keefe goes undercover at Davos, records climate execs on carbon taxes, 'artificial rain'
“Do you have a company in your portfolio that does artificial rain?”
James O’Keefe went undercover to infiltrate the World Economic Forum's annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland, where he recorded conversations with climate and finance executives discussing carbon taxes, climate credits, and weather modification.

O’Keefe and members of the O’Keefe Media Group posed as employees of a fictional climate engineering firm to gain access to late-night events, luxury hotels, and private forums associated with the annual climate gathering.

Among those recorded was Sara Lemniei, identified as the CEO of SLK Capital. In the footage, Lemniei described her firm’s role in designing carbon taxes and climate credit systems for governments and corporations around the world. She said the approach to carbon emissions is not elimination but monetization.
“We [SLK Capital] works with companies to give them new revenue streams [carbon taxes],” Lemniei said. “We can help companies in Africa and India decarbonize their operations so they can remain competitive and continue exporting to Europe.”

O’Keefe and his team also spoke with Emil C. Luth, an individual with ties to government agencies and DARPA. During the conversation, Luth discussed artificial rain and large-scale weather intervention, suggesting such efforts could be carried out in the United States and Europe.

“Do you have a company in your portfolio that does artificial rain?” Luth asked an undercover O’Keefe, who was wearing a wig.

“SAI? Stratospheric aerosol injections.” O’Keefe responded, to which Luth replied, “Wonderful!”

O’Keefe asked if he had any indirect work with artificial rain, to which he said, “There might be people around me that would have an inclination to do that.” When asked what organizations he is associated with, Luth replied, “Some with letters, some without.”

O’Keefe also recorded a presentation at the event in which an individual named Balbir Singh spoke to entrepreneurs and revealed that they have “BlackRock behind us.”

The trip further included an encounter in which O’Keefe was confronted by a local Swiss man who gestured toward a mounted cannon and commented about using its turret to shoot President Donald Trump’s plane.

“This is the best spot to kill President Trump,” the man said.