Strong winds tear off the roof of an industrial building in Ibiza, burying two cars.
Roofing sheets from a warehouse in the Eurocentro industrial park were blown off and crashed into lampposts and vehicles.
The strong windstorm that hit the Balearic Islands this past Sunday caused incidents on the island of Ibiza. Two vehicles were buried under the roof panels of an industrial building in an industrial park, which were torn off by the gale.
According to the Ibiza City Council , some sheets located on the roof of an industrial building in the Eurocentro industrial park were thrown off and hit several lampposts and some cars that were parked in a parking lot in the area.
Local police cordoned off the area early this morning, and three businesses were unable to open on Monday due to security concerns. According to the Ibiza town council, part of the street where the incident occurred has been rendered " completely impassable ."
The owners of the affected building have already begun the work of removing the debris. " They are working quickly and efficiently to try to get everything back to normal ," the City Council reported. The strong winds also caused up to 15 trees to fall in the municipality.
The Directorate General of Emergencies and Interior has activated the Meteobal Plan at Severity Index 1 (IG-1) in Ibiza to coordinate the removal of fallen trees on the island. Specifically, 54 incidents of fallen trees have occurred in Ibiza between 6:00 p.m. on Sunday and 9:30 a.m. on Monday.
Meanwhile , the Ibiza Island Fire Department has responded to 119 incidents due to the recent storm. According to a statement from the Ibiza Council, the teams dealt with incidents such as fallen trees and other obstacles on public roads, as well as dislodged urban elements.
The peak moment was recorded this Sunday starting at 9:00 p.m., when strong winds caused a build-up of warnings.
By type, the majority of callouts were for fallen signs, trees, or lampposts, totaling 57 services. There were also collaborations with other services.
The municipality where the most departures have been made has been Santa Eulària with 37; followed by Sant Josep with 34. In Sant Antoni there have been 23 departures; in Ibiza a total of 13 and in Sant Josep, seven.
On the island's road network, workers have been working until 5:00 a.m. removing obstacles and attending to affected points on different roads.