Trump cuts funding for ICE body cameras and is accused of limiting its oversight
At least three of the eight or more agents at the scene of Saturday’s shooting were wearing body cameras. The Trump administration has resisted efforts to expand the use of body cameras by federal immigration officers and has slashed surveillance staff while massively increasing the presence of agents in cities like Minneapolis. The move coincided with a series of violent incidents and fatal shootings, Reuters reported.
Citizen videos of two deadly incidents in Minneapolis in which protesters were killed have highlighted the role of images in controlling authorities. Authorities have portrayed the victims as the cause of violent confrontations with federal agents, but the recorded footage challenges those accounts.
Body cameras have been a key tool in police reform for years. However, the Trump administration bucked the trend, slowing the implementation of a pilot program to equip ICE officers with cameras and asking Congress in June to cut funding by 75%. At the same time, nearly all staff at three internal immigration enforcement agencies were placed on paid leave, severely limiting their ability to investigate allegations of abuse of power.
Darius Reeves, the former director of ICE’s Baltimore office, said the pilot program had already been delayed to 2024 and “essentially abandoned” under Trump. From the White House, spokeswoman Abigail Jackson said that ICE officers “are acting heroically in the name of law enforcement,” adding that criticism of law enforcement serves, as she said, “criminal illegal immigrants.”
Body-worn cameras
According to verified footage, at least three of the eight or more agents at the scene of Saturday’s shooting were wearing body cameras. However, it was not clear whether the devices were turned on or whether they were worn by the agents directly involved in the confrontation.
At the same time, senior administration officials were quick to characterize the victims of the deadly incidents as assailants, without calling for in-depth investigations. The tightening of immigration policy was further strengthened after Congress approved $170 billion in funding for the largest border enforcement operation.
Although the Border Patrol had 13,400 cameras for about 45,000 officers as of June, the budget proposal for fiscal year 2026 called for a “freeze” on the expansion of the program and a drastic reduction in the staff supporting it. Although the House of Representatives rejected this proposal and approved $20 million for ICE and Border Patrol cameras, the related bill does not mandate their use.
At the same time, the cut in supervisory staff at the Department of Homeland Security has left hundreds of complaints essentially unanswered. Data shows a drastic reduction in the number of workers handling reports of mistreatment in immigration detention centers, significantly limiting the ability to monitor the actions of federal agencies.
