Fayette Township mulls 1,350-acre solar power plant that already inked leases with two planning commissioners
Pair forced to recuse themselves over conflict of interest
When the Fayette Township Planning Commission discussed a proposed 1,350 acre solar power plant on Monday, two commissioners were forced to recuse themselves.

Farmer Dale Baker already agreed to lease about 850 acres to Ranger Power for the Heartwood Solar II project, after leasing 150 acres for an initial Heartwood Solar farm near Jonesville, MLive reports.
Farmer Steve McElroy, meanwhile, declined to comment on his stake in the project.
The recusals left the commission with just four members as scores of local residents railed against the solar farm at Jonesville High School on Monday.

“Lord, please protect our township from the influences both inside and outside our beautiful community that seek to alter our landscape for financial gain,” local Scott Manifold, whose home would be surrounded by solar panels, prayed to conclude his public comments.

Others pointed to state law that allows only one commissioner to also serve on the township board, or two if the other is the township supervisor.

Because two Fayette Township commissioners also serve on the board, and another did not attend, the planning commission lacked a quorum needed to take action.

After more than an hour of public comment in opposition, the commission postponed the  the meeting for the second time in as many weeks, WSYM reports.

Opponents at the meeting presented commissioners “10 Steps to Do the People’s Will – By the Book” that urged them to “take your time” in assessing additional solar development in Fayette Township, hire competent legal counsel, and draft a renewable energy ordinance.

“Over 200 people have come out – twice – to clearly tell you: They do not want more solar in the township,” the document read.

“We would like our kids to stick around and have lots of children and have some places to go,” mother of seven Melissa Danford told commissioners. “We want to preserve this way of life.”

Another resident highlighted the same concern, alleging Ranger Power would “molest our bucolic county,” according to MLive.

Brady Friss, development manager for Chicago-based Ranger Power, has worked to counter concerns from residents about water runoff, and other issues, noting the $300 million project would generate millions in property taxes.

“We’ve gotten to see a lot of success stories about landowners participating in, being able to keep their farms in their families for future generations,” Friss told MLive, pointing to multiple projects across the Midwest. “And it’s a beautiful thing.”

“We were ready to provide some information on the project but ultimately we want to be respectful of the local officials and the residents’ time here tonight,” Friss told WSYM.

The meeting is one of many in Michigan communities contemplating solar farms that have drawn widespread public opposition in recent years, thwarting climate goals adopted by Democrats in 2023.

That was the same year Democrats also approved legislation that allows developers to circumvent local approvals to apply for permits directly to the Michigan Public Service Commission, a three-member body appointed by the governor.

Fayette Township Planning Commission acting chair Jane Munson acknowledged that reality on Monday, assuring residents that commissioners “have been working with a consultant for a couple years on improving and bringing our ordinances up to date.”

Regardless, she noted, the township’s zoning administrator must review Ranger Power’s special use permit application before it comes before commissioners.

“We won’t even look at it until it has been reviewed,” she said. “So, we are a long ways away from any discussion on this.”

While that review is pending, Munson said the township board will replace commissioners Nancy DuBois or Scott Playford to comply with state law.

DuBois told MLive after the meeting she plans to leave the commission.

Her replacement would be appointed by the township supervisor, with a vote of approval from the township board.

Nate Baker, son of commissioner Dale Baker, is the township supervisor, and has vowed not to vote on the solar project, according to the news site.