Ellesmere Port’s Theatre Porto to host climate change show
A SHOW created in response to the climate crisis is coming to Ellesmere Port’s Theatre Porto in February.
Manchester-based, female-led contemporary dance company, Coalesce Dance Theatre will present their latest production Mika and the Polar Bear on tour to Theatre Porto, Ellesmere Port from February 11-25.

A spokesman for the theatre said the show will present to children the issues for climate in the world.

They said: “Created in response to the climate crisis and touring to areas of the UK directly affected by its impact, Mika and the Polar Bear is an imaginative journey into the wonders of the natural world, with themes of friendship, compassion, and the power of hope at its heart.
“This new production follows Mika, who has been swept away by a climate disaster."
“In a strange, ever-changing world, Mika encounters an array of creatures across land, sea and sky, forming an unlikely friendship with a lone Polar Bear living in an icy wonderland."
“Together they navigate the unknown and rely on each other as they search for a new beginning.”

Featuring original music by Patch Middleton and Richard Smithson, digital animation by Aaron Howell, enchanting puppetry by Bek Palmer, and contemporary dancers Janice Ho and Luke Speddings, Mika and the Polar Bear is a timely production for all ages, celebrating resilience, friendship, and courage.

Founded in 2017 by Fern Wareham and Rachel Maffei, Coalesce Dance Theatre create innovative, accessible dance works across the North of England, with a focus on supporting the wellbeing and cultural engagement of young people.

Previous productions include Threads, a powerful story about mental health and identity for teens that toured to 21 venues; The Cocoon, an uplifting celebration of womanhood; and The Old Green Time Machine, which toured to over 50 libraries.
A spokesman for the company added: “Alongside its performance work, the company runs an extensive engagement programme through DanceConnect, Manchester’s longest running pro class, and Coalesce Youth Dance, a creative training programme for young people aged 14-21.

“Both Fern and Rachel are also returning lecturers at the University of Salford and The Arden School of Theatre, Manchester, continuing their commitment to nurturing the next generation of dance artists.”

Mika and the Polar Bear is presented in association with Theatre Porto, supported by Arts Council England, Z-arts, Burnley Youth Theatre, The Riley & The North Wall.