Biomass could play a key role in Canada’s transition to a carbon-neutral economy
Record forest fires, under-utilized agricultural residues like straw and husks and struggling sawmills have left Canada with an abundance of undervalued biomass. If carefully and strategically managed, this resource could become a powerful ally in the fight against climate change.

Canada’s biomass sectors are facing significant uncertainty because of political and natural disruptions. The forestry sector was hit last year by new American tariffs announced by the Donald Trump administration on Canadian forest products, bringing the total duties imposed on Canadian lumber to 45 per cent.

The agricultural and agri-food sector is also particularly vulnerable, since it exports more than 70 per cent of its main crops.

In addition to facing these political uncertainties, biomass sectors are increasingly experiencing the effects of climate disasters. In 2025, fires had burned 8.3 million hectares of Canadian forests by Sept. 30, making it Canada’s second-worst wildfire season on record. With climate change, extreme weather events like wildfires and droughts are likely to become more frequent and intense.

Change is accelerating and risks are mounting. For industries and communities that rely on biomass, this is the moment to define a long-term role in the climate transition.

Biomass resources
Canada needs to move towards a carbon-neutral economy, and the biomass sectors have a key role to play in this transition.
The availability of diverse biomass resources in Canada’s forests and agricultural lands, combined with new technologies to convert them into bioproducts and bioenergy, makes biomass a potential solution for reducing carbon emissions in several sectors, including industry, construction and all modes of transport (road, marine, rail and air).

Biomass can be part of climate change mitigation strategies. Used properly, it can replace fossil fuels and products, and help store carbon in different ways: in sustainable materials made from wood or agricultural residues, in the form of biochar that traps carbon in the soil or through bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), which prevents carbon released during energy production from entering the atmosphere.

Several recent projects have demonstrated that interest in biomass feedstocks is high in many industries. In 2025, Canada’s first industrial-scale biochar plant was inaugurated in Québec, while the Strathcona refinery in Alberta will become Canada’s largest facility for renewable diesel.

The potential role of biomass becomes clear in the pathways now being modelled to achieve Canada’s climate goals. These analyses show that if a significant portion of available biomass were used differently, it would be possible to sequester up to 94 million tonnes of CO₂ equivalent per year through BECCS and biochar.

These results underscore the need for Canada to carefully plan new project developments and judiciously allocate biomass between its traditional and emerging uses.

Best uses for biomass
As we explain in a recent study, several factors influence the potential of biomass to reduce emissions, including the type of ecosystem where it’s harvested, the efficiency of its conversion, the fuels used and the products it replaces in the sectors concerned.

In other words, the climate benefits of biomass are not automatic: they depend on the choices that are made at each stage of the value chain. For example, if the processing or transport of resources requires a lot of fossil energy, or if the final product displaces a low-emission alternative, the climate benefit may be marginal or even negative.

Using biomass effectively requires understanding what resources will be available under climate change and their true potential to cut emissions. That potential depends not only on technological efficiency, but also on the cultural, environmental and economic realities of communities.
Still no long-term vision
Decision-makers must avoid working in isolation and take into account the collateral effects of resource allocation. Practices in biomass sectors, whether in forestry or agriculture, evolve slowly. Forests, in particular, follow long growth and harvesting cycles, so the choices made today will influence emissions for decades to come.

Yet, despite the importance of its resources, Canada has no strategy or vision for the role biomass will play in the transition to carbon neutrality by 2050.

Canada has developed several bioeconomy frameworks, including the Renewed Forest Bioeconomy Framework (2022) and the Canadian Bioeconomy Strategy (2019). However, there is still no comprehensive strategy that defines the role biomass will play in achieving a carbon-neutral future, either in energy-related or non-energy-related sectors.
Canada can draw inspiration from its own Canadian Hydrogen Strategy to develop a similar strategy for biomass, based on integrated modelling of its potential in different sectors of the Canadian economy. There is an urgent need to adopt a realistic approach based on analyses at multiple scales — from regional to national — rather than on isolated sectoral targets.

Many players in the sector are stressing the urgent need to adopt a clear national strategy for the bioeconomy in order to provide more predictability to biomass industries in Canada. In an article in Canadian Biomass Magazine, Jeff Passmore (founder and president of Scaling Up) says he’s been waiting for Canada to develop a concrete national strategy for the bioeconomy.

Another article in Bioenterprise in 2023 argued that “one of the key areas needed to build the future of biomass in Canada is a solid, long-term national bioeconomy strategy, supported by industry and governments.”

Finally, a call to action from Bioindustrial Innovation Canada recommends revising the national bioeconomy strategy by setting measurable targets for interdepartmental and intersectoral co-ordination, with a clear road map for collaboration between industry and the public sector.

Biomass cannot be managed blindly. Its impacts vary depending on the region and uses. For future projects to truly contribute to Canada’s climate goals, a coherent national vision is needed now.