'The perils of climate change': Call for better disaster response strategies in the wake of Mpumalanga and Limpopo floods
In a plea for action, Human Settlements Minister Thembi Simelane has called for a comprehensive framework aimed at mitigating the impacts of climate-induced disasters across South Africa. 

Speaking at municipal council chambers, Simelane highlighted that the initiative should extend far beyond the borders of Mpumalanga.

On Saturday, Simelane conducted an oversight visit in Mpumalanga to the area recently ravaged by floods. This visit followed her trip on Friday to Limpopo. Both provinces have been severely affected by recent flooding due to sustained, heavy rainfall.

“The initiative should not be limited to Mpumalanga but must extend nationwide to safeguard communities and strengthen resilience,” Simelane said.
She highlighted that relief efforts, particularly those concerning the human settlements emergency housing programme, are often hampered by the lack of suitable land for relocating disaster victims and inadequate planning, resulting in delays.

Stressing the need for proactive planning to lessen the effects of natural disasters, Simelane called on municipalities to ensure their disaster response strategies are in sync with the nation’s overall growth trajectory.
“We need to start planning collaboratively, plan for our growth, say where we are going and what happens during disasters. We must be proactive and prepare land accordingly with weather reports and projections,” Simelane said. 

She added that municipalities must prioritise developing plans for climate-resilient infrastructure and guarantee that relief efforts include all communities.

Simelane’s appeal for proactive, collaborative disaster mitigation planning was echoed by Mpumalanga Cooperative Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs MEC Speed Mashilo. He noted that when President Cyril Ramaphosa visited, he also pointed out the issue of a lack of planning when it comes to human settlements.

“We cannot continue to behave like we don’t know or anticipate the types of disasters, especially with our weather forecasters being able to predict the amount of rains expected to fall in the rainy seasons,” Mashilo said. 

The MEC added that joint efforts are required from the three spheres of government and communities to safeguard South Africans, particularly vulnerable groups. This cooperation is essential to shield them from severe living conditions caused by climate-induced disasters and the delayed delivery of relief, which is often hampered by unsafe or unsuitable land.
Meanwhile, Simelane and Mashilo agreed that they will also look into the other human settlements grants given to the province to assist with rebuilding of roads, sewer and storm water drainage infrastructure to mitigate damages caused by flood waters. 

Simelane said widespread damage to roads is evident. The Human Settlements Development Grant permits the MEC to allocate a portion of the funds specifically for road repairs.
She said the grant provides funding for essential repairs, such as addressing sewer pipe damage, particularly that caused by flooding, which leads to raw sewage in the streets. It also covers road repairs, specifically for routes leading to key community amenities like schools and cemeteries, and even includes assistance with access routes to residential properties.

Simelane added that they will also provide temporary housing units to families whose houses were demolished.

