Enniscorthy locals assess 'completely devastating' flood damage
Residents and businesses of Island Road in Enniscorthy, Co Wexford, are assessing the damage caused by Storm Chandra and attempting to pick up the pieces.

The long-standing residential area is one of the most flood-prone parts of the town which was devastated yesterday after the River Slaney burst its banks during heavy rain.

Brushing dirt and debris from his yard this morning, John Leacy, owner of L&M Motors, said the damage caused by the storm could cost him over €50,000.

"There was three feet of water in the garage, our machines were under water and various tools around the garage have been destroyed," he said.

"It's absolutely devastating, this is the second big flood we've had here and we can't get insurance."
Mr Leacy, whose business has been based on the road for 40 years, believes not enough is being done to warn those at risk of flooding in the area, adding that the long-proposed flood relief scheme continues to be put on "the back burner" to the risk of residents.

"We weren't approached by anyone coming up to this flood, we're lucky we're able to read the river," he said.

"I rang the council on Monday looking for sandbags and they said it was under review. They arrived at 5am the next morning, but it was way too late for the people of Island Road."

Mr Leacy said he began the business 40 years ago with John Murphy, who died two years ago.

"We’re very proud of what we’ve built, but it’s devastating to see this happen again, when a simple fix would have sufficed ten years ago," he added.

Another business owner in Enniscorthy has described the impact of flooding following the storm as "absolutely devastating".

Conor Swaine said that without a flood defence system in place, extensive flooding becomes "a matter of when it happens rather than if it happens".

"I think that the time for talking about it is over," he said.
'Heartbreaking' to see childhood home destroyed 'again and again'

Helena Cathcart and Sarah Thompson grew up on Island Road and joined their 90-year-old brother John McNamara in an attempt to salvage what was left of their childhood home.

Tearing up their lino flooring after removing lying water, Ms Cathcart said it will take months to dry out the house and restore what is now John's home to a liveable condition.
"It's heartbreaking to stand outside and watch your childhood home be destroyed again and again and see the Government do nothing about it," she said.

"And if they mention moving that bridge again, I’ll get my hammer and move it myself," she added.

Patrick O'Brien is 81 and lives with his dog Lucky on Island Road. As a result of yesterday's flood, all of his appliances have been destroyed.

"The water came up through my floor, as high as 17 or 18 inches. It's completely devastating for me anyway. I live here on my own," he said.
Maureen Peare turns 76 this week and has lived on Island Road her entire life. Yesterday's flood is the fifth she has experienced there so far.

"The flood is only hitting me now. It didn't hit me yesterday because I was so busy trying to move my stuff. I live alone and it's very hard," she said.

Ms Peare added that there is no "protection against floods whatsoever" in the area.
"They’ve been talking about it since 1947 when there was a big flood here on St Patrick's Day. We need more help," she said.

Recently renovated home in Co Wicklow decimated

Enniscorthy was not the only area affected by Storm Chandra. Towns and villages along the Slaney catchment and its tributaries also saw significant flooding yesterday.

In Aughrim, Co Wicklow, dozens of homes were heavily damaged after intense flooding left much of the village completely submerged.

One homeowner, Pete Hurley, said his recently-renovated home in Fairgeen, also known as the Holiday Village overlooking the Aughrim river, was the "palace" he shared with his husband until knee high floods of water decimated their ground floor.

He alongside 11 of his neighbours in the riverside estate, believe they will have to leave their homes for a number of weeks.

"It’s very upsetting. The lounge was beautiful, we just got new furniture and a beautiful new wooden floor, but everything is destroyed," he said.
"I can't believe the amount of damage the water did, it’s unforgiving really.

"It’s a real worry about what could happen here in the future, and given current climatic conditions, this is what we’ll continue to face," he said.

Mr Hurley bought the house four years ago, and following his husband's recovery from illness, believed "things were coming right for us" - however, the destruction of his home has been a "huge drawback".

"This has taken a huge toll on us. We will get back hopefully, but it's very difficult."

'It’s all gone'

In nearby Bunclody, in north Co Wexford, residents of Ryland Road were moved to the nearby Hazel Tree Lodge.

Among them are Diane Doran and her partner Nicky Caeser, who believe proper precautions were not put in place ahead of Storm Chandra’s arrival.
"We’re devastated, our houses are absolutely destroyed, the water was up to our knees. It was a derelict house, we worked so hard to renovate it and now it’s all gone," Ms Doran said.

She added that the sandbags which the council provided to residents were a "basic" expectation that only arrived when the damage was done.

"It was too little too late when they came with sandbags, most of which we filled ourselves," she said.