Trump administration weighs mining off Alaska’s coast
The Trump administration is considering mining off Alaska’s coast, which has never been done before.

The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM), part of the Interior Department, announced Tuesday that it would issue a Request for Information to gauge corporate interest and collect public input on the idea.

It said that the request is not necessarily a decision to move forward. Large-scale deep sea mining has never been done.

The move comes after the administration said last week that it would seek to speed up the approval timeline for deep sea mining. Last year, it also said it would assess the potential for mining off the coast of American Samoa.

“Alaska’s offshore holds strategic potential for the minerals that drive American industry, defense and next-generation technologies,” BOEM acting Director Matt Giacona said Tuesday in a statement.

“This Request for Information is a practical first step to gauge interest and identify areas where development could make sense for jobs, investment and national supply chains,” Giacona added.

Historically, the U.S. has leased parts of the nation’s coasts for oil and gas, and more recently for offshore wind.

President Trump has sought to jumpstart deep sea mining, issuing an executive order last year. The administration has more broadly sought to expand mining and access to minerals, including for uses in defense and other technology.

Trump also said that mineral rights would be part of a deal on Greenland’s future as he pushes for control of the island.

Environmental advocates recoiled at the Trump administration’s latest proposal.

“This step toward offshore mining shows that the Trump administration only sees Alaska’s vibrant seafloor as an extraction zone for corporate profit,” said Cooper Freeman, Alaska director at the Center for Biological Diversity. “The health and vitality of Alaskan coastal communities are deeply tied to a healthy ocean. Destroying the seafloor by mining puts the entire marine food web in grave danger, from walruses and bearded seals to crab and halibut.”