8600 premature deaths due to wood heating
Wood burning causes 8,600 premature deaths each year in the United States, according to a new study published Friday in Science Advances . The health aspects of wood-burning stoves are increasingly controversial.

“Only 2% of homes in the United States are heated with wood, but they emit 95% of the fine particulate matter from heating,” says Kyan Shlipak of Northwestern University in Chicago, the study’s lead author. “We estimate that 20% of deaths from fine particulate matter are linked to wood heating.”

Bryan Ross, a pulmonologist at the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre (MUHC), believes this is one of the most realistic estimates of the impact of wood heating. "Their modeling is much more spatially accurate than others. They use a 4 km resolution."

Dr. Ross  is a specialist in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which causes difficulty breathing. In a study to be published in 2026, he found that COPD attacks during the winter are primarily linked to fine particulate matter. Therefore, possibly, to wood burning.

“Exposure to fine particulate matter has both long-term and short-term effects,” says Dr. Ross  . “For example, we see someone who grew up in Bangladesh in a house where they cooked with fossil fuels and had poor ventilation, and who will develop COPD at 40 even if they have never smoked. And there are people who have COPD who will have attacks because of fine particulate matter, partly caused by wood burning.”

It is not possible at this time to determine whether wood heating causes more health problems because of its long-term chronic effects, or because of short-term acute effects, for example COPD attacks, according to Dr. Ross  .

In 2022, a Scandinavian study published in the journal BMC Public Health attempted to estimate the reduction in life expectancy associated with wood heating in Scandinavia. In major Scandinavian cities, the reduction ranged from one to eight months, with peaks of nearly two years in one Oslo neighborhood. By comparison, smoking reduces life expectancy by 10 years. According to Mr. Shlipak, this Scandinavian study used a model that attributed more negative health effects to wood heating than his own.

Torben Sigsgaard of Aarhus University in Denmark, one of the authors of the BMC Public Health study, believes that wood burning should be banned. "Yes, it's less dangerous than smoking, but the impact is very significant for people who don't heat with wood. To smoke or not is an individual decision." He believes it's impossible to determine the proportion of health impacts from wood burning that are borne by residents of homes that burn wood, compared to their neighbors.

In Canada
In Quebec, the Families for Clean Air group is campaigning to limit wood burning for heating, and major cities like Montreal and Laval have tightened the restrictions on the types of fireplaces permitted. Quebec City, for its part, has banned wood burning during smog episodes. Open fires in provincial parks have also been called into question.

In 2023, a Health Canada model estimated that wood heating causes 1,300 premature deaths per year in Quebec, twice as many as pollution from road vehicles. Another Health Canada study, published in 2021, cited an even higher figure: 4,000 deaths annually in Quebec. And a 2024 study by the Quebec National Institute of Public Health suggested that stricter standards for wood-burning fireplaces would reduce the amount of fine particulate matter by 30%.


