Could another storm hit the East Coast soon? Here are the possibilities.
More snow is probably on its way. Multiple weather models are simulating what could be another system that brings plowable snow to parts of the East.

Right on the heels of a prolific snow and ice storm, another big snowstorm is brewing.

This weekend, a powerful nor’easter is forecast to form near the East Coast, bringing the potential for significant snow, wind and waves.

Want to know how your actions can help make a difference for our planet? Sign up for the Climate Coach newsletter, in your inbox every Tuesday and Thursday.
The extent of impacts will be determined by how close to the coast the storm tracks, but it looks like areas from the Carolinas — especially the Outer Banks — to the coastal Mid-Atlantic and southeast New England, including Cape Cod, Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket, are most at-risk.

This potent storm is looking increasingly likely to usher a renewed threat of coastal flooding, which is concerning because the Outer Banks were repeatedly hit by destructive storms last year.

The nor’easter will form when a meandering lobe of the polar vortex reaches the Eastern Seaboard on Saturday, clashing with milder Atlantic Ocean air. This temperature clash will create an intense baroclinic zone or a region with great temperature changes over short distances — helping to spawn the next tempest.

🌱
Follow Climate & environment

Follow
For areas farther inland, this intensifying storm is looking like a close call between a near-miss or a glancing blow, including the stretch from D.C. to Boston from late Saturday through Sunday.

Just a 50-mile shift in the storm track could mean the difference between snow or dry conditions.

What we know
There are four things we know about this upcoming system:

It’s probable this storm will form. Just 24 hours ago, the jury was out. Now, most of the larger-scale weather models depict a low-pressure area forming. And, now that we’re within five days of the anticipated event, the weather models suggest the wintry potential is growing.
This storm system could strengthen fast. The European model depicts an intense bomb cyclone, or a rapidly intensifying low-pressure system. In fact, that model simulates a system stronger than a “double-bomb,” strengthening 180 percent faster than the threshold needed to be classified as a bombogenetic cyclone. The American GFS model is identical in its simulated rate of intensification. It’s rare to see such identical computer model output at this time range.
This would mean more snow. Because of all the antecedent cold air in place, unlike the last system — which was accompanied by mixed precipitation along the Interstate 95 corridor — this next one would probably be all snow.
Odds favor the storm staying to the east of the D.C. area. The majority of computer models suggest the storm will form too far east to bring substantial snow to the D.C. region, still reeling from 6 to 9 inches of cement-like snow and ice on Sunday and historically low temperatures. However, the American model — while mostly an outlier — does simulate substantial snow in D.C., and this slight possibility needs to be watched.
Here are the possibilities

It’s unclear how quickly the storm will develop and how close it will track to the Eastern Seaboard.

One of the classic ingredients for a high-end winter storm is a high-pressure system south of Greenland. That blocks the storm from drifting quickly out to sea, and it provides an uninterrupted supply of cold air. That’s missing this time.
Instead, high pressure over central Canada will provide the cold air, but it is simultaneously going to be diverting the system eastward. High-pressure systems are like big force fields that shove other weather systems away. This low-pressure storm system will materialize off the Carolina coast late Saturday, but how quickly will it be pushed east?

Right now, it looks like the system will be far enough east to spare most of the Mid-Atlantic serious impacts — with a few exceptions.

The American GFS model solution is slightly to the west of the European model solution. The American model suggests a system would slam the Outer Banks with blizzard conditions and bring legitimate, plowable and significant snow to eastern North Carolina, coastal Delmarva and southeastern Massachusetts and Rhode Island.
Meanwhile, the European model depicts a system only grazing Cape Cod, Massachusetts, while plastering the Outer Banks with heavy snow.

At this point, forecasters are most concerned with the potential for a rare, significant snowfall on the Outer Banks. That would be unusual, but it does occasionally happen — one example was during Christmas week of 1989, when Hatteras, North Carolina, recorded 13.3 inches of snowfall.

Strong winds would also accompany the low-pressure area, meaning blizzard conditions aren’t out of the question.

