Bushfire threatens dozens of homes in Ellenbrook, north-east of Perth
A bushfire has broken out in suburban Perth, with a quick-moving blaze putting dozens of homes and lives at risk.

It was spotted just before 3pm on Thursday in a small pocket of bushland in Ellenbrook, about 30 kilometres north-east of Perth.

The area is surrounded by more than 100 houses, tightly packed in a modern residential estate.

A watch-and-act warning is in place for people in an area bounded by The Broadway, Galatea Pass, Farmaner Parkway and Elmridge Parkway.

Firefighters say it is not safe for residents who fled the area to return.

Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) district officer Tim McGrade said he was aware of between six and eight properties that had sustained damage.


He said authorities were not aware of any injuries, despite chaos on the roads as the fire closed in. One car was reported to have crashed into a tree.

Mr McGrade said it was too early to say if the fire was deliberately lit, with the arson squad conducting an investigation.

At least three planes and two helicopters took to the air to assist in the operation.


The police arson squad was on site at the control centre, consulting with fire crews.

Some people on the periphery of the warning zone were standing outside their houses prepared to leave.


Aerial footage showed a cabana engulfed in flames in the backyard of a home.

Huge plumes of smoke could be seen blowing across the residential area.

Emergency services were deployed to the scene, including aerial support to battle the blaze.
Fire trucks were seen hosing down scorched land right next to the fence line of some homes.
'Mayhem' on the ground
Resident Bruce described the situation on the ground in Ellenbrook as "mayhem".

"There's people obviously trying to get out of the area, the immediate area, and a lot of panicked residents," he told ABC Radio Perth.

"Some on their roofs, quite close to the flames, but generally yeah, it's pretty chaotic."

He said he saw the blaze spreading quickly, and said the height of some flames were towering over homes.

"It's jumped a couple of roads already, heading east," he said.

Residents have described some of the flames as being twice the height of their homes.

"The flames just came so quickly ... one minute it was there, and the next it was here and funnelling down our street," Natalie Packer said.

Her neighbour Sylvana Hedger recalled the chaos of the blazes pivoting in the wind.

"The wind has changed directions several times, so just when we thought we were in the clear, it sprung up in front of us," she said.
Another resident, Mark Musariri, was hosing down a strip of bushland behind his home while flames were smouldering in another nearby patch of bushland.

"Scared ... I had to take off with the kids first then come back and fight the fire," he said.

The temperature in Perth reached 34C on Thursday, with strong winds forecast to continue during the evening.


