The fires in Argentine Patagonia have ravaged more than 45,000 hectares out of control.

The fires in Argentine Patagonia are experiencing one of their worst seasons in decades, fueled by climate change and a lack of state resources. More than 45,000 hectares have already been destroyed, with forests, homes, and infrastructure reduced to ashes

The fires in Argentine Patagonia are spreading uncontrollably.
The fire is advancing unchecked in the south of the country, with thousands of hectares destroyed, communities at risk, and strong criticism for the lack of prevention.

Argentine Patagonia is facing one of its worst wildfire seasons in decades since the start of the Southern Hemisphere summer, fueled by harsh weather conditions and reduced state resources for prevention and response. More than 45,000 hectares of protected areas, homes, and infrastructure have already been destroyed.

In Los Alerces National Park, in the province of Chubut, fires sparked by lightning in December have burned approximately 20,000 hectares of mountainous forest. And they continue to spread toward nearby residential areas despite ongoing firefighting efforts.

Climate change and extreme drought are behind the fires in Patagonia
Argentine Patagonia has been facing one of its worst fire seasons in decades since the start of the Southern Hemisphere summer. This comes amid increasingly changing weather patterns and reduced state resources for preventing and containing the fires. They have already destroyed more than 45,000 hectares of protected areas, homes, and infrastructure.

In Los Alerces National Park, in the province of Chubut, 20,000 hectares of mountainous terrain covered in forest and vegetation have been affected by fires. These were attributed to a lightning strike last December. The problem is that firefighters and forest brigades have not yet been able to contain their advance toward nearby residential areas.

About 200 kilometers further south, a fire in a wooded area known as Puerto Patriada has burned over 23,000 hectares in recent days. It has also affected numerous homes in the tourist towns of Epuyén and El Hoyo.

In the El Turbio area, also in Chubut, another 3,000 hectares have burned since the beginning of 2016. These fires are in addition to several smaller ones scattered throughout other parts of Patagonia, the full impact of which has not yet been calculated.

Different local, provincial, and national brigades were deployed to the various fire zones to contain the blaze, with hundreds of specialized firefighters, volunteers, and support personnel. This was accompanied by the deployment of ground vehicles, fire trucks, helicopters, and even large water-bomber aircraft .

Through the coordination of the Federal Emergency Agency , an agency under the Ministry of National Security, resources and personnel flowed in from all over the country. Even firefighters from Chile came to provide support.

Human negligence and prevention failures exacerbate forest fires
Summer is the most favorable season for the spread of fires in the Patagonian Andean forest, due to the usual characteristics of the climate.

But experts explained that the rise in average temperature and the lower accumulation of snow and precipitation during the rest of the year increase the likelihood of fires starting, whether due to natural events or human action—or inaction.

In the case of Puerto Patriada, the courts are investigating a possible intentional cause after finding fuel in the area. The Argentine government pointed the finger at "self-proclaimed Mapuche terrorist groups." But judicial sources quickly clarified that they are not considering that hypothesis as part of their investigation.

In the province of Santa Cruz, approximately 700 hectares burned from the end of December 2025 due to a campfire that was not properly extinguished. And in Río Negro, another 3,000 hectares were affected by a grassland fire that began in a controlled manner by farmers but spread far beyond what was expected.

Humans are behind most of the fires in Argentine Patagonia
“ Ninety-five percent of fires are caused by humans , but that doesn’t mean they are intentional,” explained Hernán Giardini, coordinator of the Forest Campaign at Greenpeace. He was referring to the fact that fires can be caused by isolated acts of negligence, but also by errors in the management of areas with fire potential.

Organizations such as Greenpeace and the Environment and Natural Resources Foundation (FARN) point out that, in parallel with the current climatic conditions, the budgetary and strategic decisions of the Government of President Javier Milei have caused delays in the early fight against the fire .

Andrés Nápoli, executive director of FARN, warned that the Executive spent only 75% of the budget allocated to fire management in the last year and that the national funds approved by Congress to prevent and combat forest fires were cut by 71% in 2026 .

Budget cuts delay response to fires in Argentine Patagonia
“The legislators representing the provinces affected by the fires approved these reductions through a comprehensive agreement with the government,” Nápoli emphasized. The governors of these provinces, led by Ignacio Torres of Chubut, requested that Congress declare a national fire emergency due to the blazes. This is something the provincial executives had already done last October in response to what they described as “the most severe drought since 1965.”

Both FARN and Greenpeace agree that the best way to control wildfires is through prevention. Because once a fire is raging, it's very difficult to contain it without rain.

“It’s great that water-bomber planes are intervening, but it’s like your house being on fire and you trying to put it out with a glass of water ,” Giardini said. He illustrated the extent of the fires in Chubut by pointing out that the burned area is equivalent to twice the size of the city of Buenos Aires, the country’s capital and home to more than three million people.

Experts link the magnitude and intensity of wildfires to rising average temperatures , as well as reduced snowfall and decreased rainfall. They explain that these conditions increase the risk of fires caused by both natural causes and human activity.

While most fires are caused by humans, they are not necessarily intentional. They are often due to negligence or poor land management. Furthermore, environmental organizations warn that budget cuts and insufficient investment from the national government have hampered early fire control efforts. Read more at ECO AMERICA