Extreme heat in 2050 will affect almost half the planet

Extreme heat in 2050 could become the norm for almost half the world's population if the planet reaches 2°C of global warming

This is the warning from a study by Oxford University , which alerts to serious consequences for health, the economy and energy consumption.

Extreme heat in 2050 will mark a tipping point
A study from Oxford University warns of unprecedented impacts on health, energy and development if the 2°C threshold is reached .

Africa and Latin America, the most affected
Nearly half of the world's population (some 3.8 billion people) will live in extreme heat by 2050 , according to a study by Oxford University published this Monday, if the world reaches 2°C of global warming, a scenario that scientists see as increasingly likely.

In 2010, 23% of the world's population lived in extreme heat, a percentage that, according to research published today in the British journal Nature Sustainability , will increase to 41% in the coming decades.

The study highlights that the 20 countries with the most significant changes in cooling degree days (GDD) are all developing nations, mainly in Africa, Central America, South America and Southeast Asia, as they are located near the Equator and in subtropical latitudes.

In the case of South America, the countries most affected by extreme heat in 2050 will be Brazil, Venezuela and Paraguay; while in Central America the study cites Honduras, Guatemala and Nicaragua among the nations that will experience the greatest variations in DRG.

The Oxford report comes a few months after another study warned that heat-related mortality had increased by 103% between 1990 and 2021 in Latin America and the Caribbean.

The heat has cost the Latin American region some $855 million (€719 million) annually in the period 2015-2024, the document points out.

Colder countries will also experience more heat
On the other hand, the study asserts that countries with colder climates will also experience greater changes on hot days. If a 2°C warming is reached, temperatures could rise by 100% in Austria and Canada, or by up to 230% in the case of Ireland.

In this regard, the research indicates that these changes could strain the economic development of the regions and will also lead to a significant increase in the demand for energy for cooling and heating systems and their corresponding emissions.

Impact on health, energy and economy
The study's lead author and researcher at Oxford University's Zero Institute , Spaniard Jesús Lizana, explained in a statement that most changes in demand happen before reaching the 1.5°C threshold, so it will require implementing " significant adaptation measures from the outset ."

Urgent adaptation before 1.5°C
" Many households may need to install air conditioning in the next five years, but temperatures will continue to rise well beyond that if we reach 2°C of global warming ," Lizana added.

For her part, Rahika Khosla, associate professor at the Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment , warned that exceeding the 1.5°C warming mark will already have an " unprecedented impact " on sectors such as education, health, migration, and agriculture, and reiterated that sustainable development with net-zero emissions is the " only established path " to reverse the trend of hotter days.
