85 seconds to global catastrophe: Scientists' disturbing update on the Doomsday Clock
Conflicts, nuclear proliferation, but also the use of artificial intelligence and climate change. The experts of The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists raise the alarm: in 2025, another four seconds towards irreparable damage have been recorded.

The apocalypse has never been closer. The hands of the Doomsday Clock , ticking humanity's fate to the rhythm of progress and the new technologies we gradually implement, have been moved forward. There are now only 85 seconds to midnight, the symbolic hour of global catastrophe.

With a stern look, the scientists at The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , a nonprofit organization founded in 1947, have updated the clock designed by scientists such as Albert Einstein and J. Robert Oppenheimer after the nuclear disasters of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. A symbolic wake-up call to open our eyes to how some of the inventions we are developing are bringing us closer to self-destruction.

"The Bulletin's Science and Safety Committee believes that humanity has not made sufficient progress in addressing the existential risks that threaten us all. We have therefore decided to move the clock forward," said Alexandra Bell, president and CEO of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. "The Doomsday Clock is a tool to communicate how close we are to destroying the world with technologies we ourselves have created. The risks we face from nuclear weapons, climate change, and disruptive technologies are all increasing. Every second counts, and we are running out of time. It's a harsh truth, but this is our reality. We are now 85 seconds to midnight."

In 2025, the clocks jumped forward by a full 4 seconds (compared to 89 seconds at the time of the disaster the previous year), driven by the threat of nuclear war, the accelerated development of nuclear arsenals , and the risk that nuclear weapons could be deployed in space. Then there's worsening climate change , the risk of biological disasters and pandemics from which we are ill-equipped to defend ourselves, and, above all, the development of artificial intelligence.

“We are at the most critical moment in the history of the clock. In every area we observe, we have not only failed to take the steps needed to reduce the risks to humanity but have created even greater ones. Conflicts have intensified in 2025 with multiple military operations involving nuclear-armed states,” said Daniel Halz , chairman of the Chicago-based Bulletin board, drawing attention to another dangerous countdown: “Next week, the last treaty regulating nuclear weapons stockpiles between the United States and Russia expires. For the first time in over half a century, there will be nothing to prevent an unbridled nuclear arms race.”

Are those four seconds Trump's fault? Russia, China, and the United States have a lot of blame to throw around, but atomic scientists are pointing the finger at the president and head of the world's largest economy: "When Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump met in Alaska, the issue of renewing the New Start nuclear treaty wasn't raised. There needs to be some predictability about the number of weapons the United States and Russia will deploy, and then we need to start engaging China on the same issue," says Steve Fetter, a member of the Bulletin's Board of Directors. "The reality is that under the various administrations preceding Trump, maintaining international security was a daily chore. Since the tycoon took office, that has stopped. There are no intelligent people working on this issue, interacting with our adversaries to try to reduce the nuclear threat. And that's what needs to change."

Trump is at the forefront of what the Bulletin's scientists call "autocratic tendencies that hinder international cooperation and act as a threat multiplier, making the world more helpless in the face of existential dangers," as Halz observes: "We are alarmed by the recent tragedies in Minnesota and the erosion of American citizens' constitutional rights. History has shown that when governments fail to be accountable to their citizens, conflict and poverty ensue. And this global trend makes the world more dangerous for everyone."

Adding to the concerns of the Doomsday Clock scientists is artificial intelligence: the threat of its unregulated integration into military equipment, its potential misuse to create biological threats, and AI's role in spreading disinformation globally. "The technology that governs our lives is causing an information armageddon. From social media to generative artificial intelligence, none of these technologies is anchored in facts. The platforms that mediate our information were built on an extractive and predatory model. They have turned our attention into a commodity and our outrage into their business model. They don't connect us, they divide us. And this division has allowed the collapse of cooperation and the rise of illiberal leaders who exploit chaos," emphasized Nobel Peace Prize winner and Rappler CEO Maria Ressa . "What we are witnessing," Ressa continued, "is something even more dangerous: the fusion of state powers with the tech oligarchs who control the platforms."

And while the world debates the benefits and dangers of artificial intelligence, this technology is already proving to be a scourge for British workers. A study by Morgan Stanley found that the UK has been hit harder than other major global economies like Japan, the United States, Germany, and Australia by the use of AI, responsible for an 8% reduction in jobs in British companies over the past 12 months.

But is it still possible to turn back the hands of the Doomsday Clock? Yes. And this is the message from the Chicago scientists and the true mission of the Doomsday Clock. "The clock doesn't predict the future but sheds light on the current situation. It has been turned back before and can be again," they say, "but it's up to us. Citizens around the world must demand that their governments do more, that they cooperate to identify and mitigate risks to the world, or perhaps find leaders willing to do so. The technologies and capabilities to turn back the clock already exist."