Local farmers impacted by climate change
Farmers in Sarnia-Lambton are constantly being impacted by the unpredictable climate and the ever-changing economy.

Fifth-generation farmer Joel Macklin said climate change used to seem like something that would only happen in the distant future, but it is happening now and faster than expected.

"The weather just becomes more extreme and unpredictable, which makes farming more difficult to plan, predict and make most profitable. Farming can be challenging on the best of days. It's basically a form of gambling. It adds physical, financial and mental stresses to farmers," said Macklin. "This year has been a good example of extreme weather conditions such as late frost, drought, flooding, hail, heat and days with smoke from the forest fires."

Macklin gave insight into what he and his family go through in trying to keep their farm operational, as well as how other farmers are impacted across the province, as the guest speaker at the Kiwanis Club of Sarnia-Lambton Golden K meeting on January 20.

"We are losing over 319 acres per day to non-farming activities that converts into over 116,000 acres a year in Ontario, due to urban developments and aggregate operations, only 1.1% of Ontarians live on a farm. Less people have a close connection with the land compared to a century ago," said Macklin.

The unpredictable weather and changing economy have a range of effects on farmers, their crops and their land.

"Climate change is altering ecosystem rhythms, birds, insects and pollinators, the silent allies of agriculture, are responding in unpredictable ways," said Macklin. "Climate change disrupts every stage of crop production, decreased yields, higher temperatures and unpredictable rainfall are lowering productivity in crops like corn, wheat and soybeans. Reduced nutrition value, droughts and heat stress lower the protein and micronutrient content of grains affected food quality and human health."

Macklin's Farm Produce offers a store with fresh fruit and vegetables, and also offers apple and strawberry picking when the seasons arrive. The farm also donates its produce to local charities.

