Millions of gallons of sewage spilled into the Potomac River
Crews are working to pump and divert the sewage but heavy snow could impact their work.

Millions of gallons of untreated sewage have spilled into the Potomac River after part of a major pipeline collapsed near the Capital Beltway in Maryland.

For the past three days, D.C. Water crews have been working to install bypass pumps to contain the sewer overflow along the Clara Barton Parkway in Montgomery County after the break was reported late Monday night.

A section of the 54-mile sewer line, known as the Potomac Interceptor, collapsed, resulting in a “significant overflow,” according to officials with D.C. Water. The interceptor line is roughly 60 years old and carries up to 60 million gallons of wastewater daily from Loudoun and Fairfax counties, areas near Washington Dulles International Airport, Vienna, Herndon and Montgomery County to the Blue Plains Wastewater plant for treatment.

The broken pipe measured roughly six feet in diameter, which officials said was a “very, very large” break. Officials said they don’t yet know exactly how many gallons went into the river and what caused the problem.

“Given the amount of flow that comes through this pipeline, we know this is a significant amount of overflow that we’re talking about — millions of gallons — that have entered the Potomac River,” Sherri Lewis, a D.C. Water spokesperson, said in an interview Friday.

D.C. Water officials said the break does not impact the public’s drinking water because the systems used for human consumption and wastewater are separate. Some parts of the Clara Barton Parkway have been closed so crews can work on the damaged pipe and there may be ongoing road closures as well. Drivers should expect delays.

Residents who live near the area may notice an odor from the overflow. The public — and their pets — are advised to avoid touching any wastewater in the area and to seek medical attention if needed. Untreated sewage can cause a variety of illnesses, including E. coli and hepatitis.

It is not immediately known how long it will take crews to repair the pipe, but D.C. Water officials said they will work through the upcoming snowstorm that’s predicted to hit the region.

“Our progress could be slowed because of the weather,” Lewis said, “but we understand the gravity of the situation and we need to get this work done.”

Crews are trying to contain the sewer overflow into the Potomac River by creating a bypass. They’re using heavy equipment and high-powered industrial pumps — which can move up to 7 million gallons a day — to reroute the wastewater. They’ll redirect it around the damaged section of the Potomac Interceptor sewer line and send it about 125 feet to a dry section of the C&O Canal where it can “be safely contained and directed back into the sewer line further downstream,” according to statements from D.C. Water.

Late Friday afternoon, D.C. Water spokesman John Lisle said in an email that the “overflow was not contained yet” and the bypass pumps were installed, but crews were still working on some other parts of the bypass and they “anticipate turning on the pumps” Monday.

Lewis said the canal is designed to be gravity-fed so the sewage will “flow down and then be diverted back” into the Potomac Interceptor.

The canal’s locks 11, 12 and 13 were removed to accommodate the bypass, officials said.

Once the overflow is stopped and the pipe is repaired, Lisle said there are plans to survey the canal and areas where the sewage overflowed.

The interceptor pipeline is part of an aging system. A 10-year, $625 million “high priority” project is underway, D.C. Water officials said, to rehabilitate its “most vulnerable sections.”

Lisle said the section where the collapse happened is planned for rehabilitation as part of its capital construction project but they were “not currently working in that area.” Another portion of the rehab work was underway about a quarter-mile away from the site of the collapse, he said.

Allison Colden, Maryland executive director at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, said there are environmental concerns, given the amount of sewage that spilled.

“Whether it’s millions of gallons or tens of millions of gallons, any time untreated waste water is reaching our rivers and the Chesapeake Bay, it is not good,” she said. “It carries toxic chemicals, microplastics, pharmaceuticals, excess nutrients, viruses and bacteria.” She also noted that nutrients can drain oxygen quickly, contributing to fish kills and algae blooms.

Colden said Maryland, D.C. and Virginia have “come a long way” in making improvements to deal with waste water treatment but “what this incident shows is that we have to make sure the efforts are combined with updating the pipes and networks in and out of our plants.”

Colden said D.C. Water has talked about its capital improvement project for fixing the aging pipe system but “the upgrades didn’t come fast enough.”

Dean Naujoks, of the Potomac River Keeper Network, said his group has documented signs of fish kill and have taken environmental samples to try to determine if — or how — the watershed and river have been impacted. The initial test results are not expected back until at least early next week, Naujoks said.

He acknowledged that D.C. Water is working diligently but said that city and suburban health officials haven’t done enough to alert the public.

“It’s Virginia sewage that’s coming in. But the pipe broke in Maryland and unfortunately, it’s all flowing into D.C. water,” Naujoks said. “It just seems like everybody’s pointing the finger and somebody else to deal with this problem.”

D.C. Water said it is working with several partners from D.C.; Montgomery, Fairfax and Loudoun counties; state agencies; plus federal offices, including the Environmental Protection Agency, National Park Service and U.S. Coast Guard to contain the overflow and monitor environmental impacts.

