Torrential rains in southern Africa increase by 40% due to climate change

Torrential rains  in southern Africa  are now 40% more intense than in the pre-industrial era, according to science. Human-caused climate change is behind devastating floods that affect millions of people and hit the most vulnerable communities particularly hard

Between January 10 and 19 of this year, areas of Mozambique, South Africa, Zimbabwe and Eswatini received amounts of rain equivalent to what would normally fall in a whole year, but in just ten days , triggering devastating floods, overflowing rivers and serious damage to infrastructure and homes.

The consequences of these changes have been devastating: hundreds of thousands of people have been affected, with mass displacements and losses of crops and key infrastructure, while authorities and aid organizations face a humanitarian emergency.

Torrential rains in southern Africa are intensifying due to climate change
A scientific study reveals that human-caused global warming exacerbates extreme events that already leave thousands of victims in the region.

The intensity of torrential rains in southern Africa has increased by 40% since pre-industrial times, as shown by the recent devastating floods in countries of the region , according to a study published this Thursday.

The report, from the scientific collaboration group World Weather Attribution (WWA) , states that human-caused climate change exacerbated the intensity of these rainfalls, although it fails to specify the extent to which the La Niña weather phenomenon also had an impact.

Climate change and extreme rainfall: a lethal combination in southern Africa
According to the research, the frequency of extreme rainfall is approximately every fifty years under current climatic conditions, but would be "much less frequent" in a climate 1.3 degrees cooler.

"If all (40%) is due to climate change (caused by humans), we cannot say so, as climate models have known limitations in representing extreme rainfall processes in this region," said Friederike Otto, professor of Climate Science at the Centre for Environmental Policy at Imperial College London, in a virtual press conference on Wednesday.

"However, the strong trend observed and the extensive literature documenting the upward trends and extreme rainfall in different subregions , as well as the duration and season of the rains, suggest that we can be fairly certain that climate change exacerbated this phenomenon," he added.

The reason these climate models don't work well for understanding weather events in the region is that none of them were designed in Africa , so they don't take into account some factors that determine the climate on this continent, Otto explained.

La Niña worsens torrential rains in southern Africa
The situation is also being aggravated by La Niña , a phenomenon that causes wetter conditions in this part of the world and which, according to the WWA study, makes these torrential rains five times more likely and increases their intensity by about 20%.

Heavy rains and flooding since mid-December 2025 have affected some 1.3 million people in southern Africa , destroying homes, critical infrastructure and farmland and disrupting access to health services, increasing the risk of waterborne and mosquito-borne diseases, the World Health Organization (WHO) said last Friday.

In Mozambique, the worst-affected country, at least 139 people have died and almost 821,000 have been affected , according to the latest figures released this Wednesday by the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGD); while South Africa has recorded 31 deaths and its government declared a national state of disaster on the 18th, after tourist visits to the famous Kruger National Park (north) were suspended due to the rains.

Likewise, at least 89 people have lost their lives in Zimbabwe and 40 in Malawi, according to their respective authorities.

Floods, poverty and inequality: the human impact of climate disaster
The reason these climate models don't work well for understanding weather events in the region is that none of them have been designed in Africa, so they don't take into account some factors that determine the climate on this continent.

In this regard, the WWA report highlighted that "the impact of flooding is disproportionately severe for low-income and marginalized communities " living in informal settlements in these countries, due to "rapid urbanization and inadequate planning and access to basic services."

The most vulnerable communities are not only more exposed , but also suffer disruption to "life-supporting systems," experts warned.

" Older people, people with disabilities, and people living with HIV face greater risks, as floods damage health facilities, destroy medical supplies and cold chain infrastructure, and cut off access to clinics," the scientists added.

In summary, the study provides increasingly clear evidence that climate change is driving a substantial increase in the intensity of torrential rains in one of the continent's most vulnerable regions. Read more in  CLIMATE CHANGE .