Large study of the world's trees shows threat to forests' CO2 storage
Danish researcher behind new international study calls trend toward fast-growing tree species alarming.

Alien fast-growing trees displace slow-growing species, and the result is a weakened biodiversity and ability to store CO2.

That is one of the conclusions of a major international study of the world's trees.

Danish professor Jens-Christian Svenning is among the researchers behind the study. According to him, the development is "alarming".

He particularly warns against the loss of tree species found in very limited areas of the world such as the Andes and Central America.

The areas' native tree species create habitats for animals, fungi and insects, stabilize the soil, and regulate the water cycle, whereas the fast-growing ones are more vulnerable to drought, storms, pests and climatic shocks.

- This makes the forests less stable and less able to store carbon in the long term, says Jens-Christian Svenning.

The slow-growing trees are threatened by deforestation, the construction of new roads, and the harvesting of timber because it is of good quality.

More profit in the faster species
However, good quality does not mean that it is the type of wood that is prioritized in modern forestry.

And this is because there is more profit in the faster species such as acacia, eucalyptus, poplar and pine, says Jens-Christian Svenning.

Similarly, slow-growing species are also threatened by the fact that competition for light, water and nutrients intensifies when more fast-growing trees appear.

- All of this has to do with human activity, which on the one hand promotes some species by spreading them around the world and on the other hand pressures other species through logging and plantations with fast-growing trees, he says.

With the study, published on Wednesday in the scientific journal Nature Plants, the researchers have examined 31,000 different tree species to project what the distribution of species in the world's forests will look like in the future.

And with the results, Jens-Christian Svenning warns that tree species - especially slow-growing ones - may risk being lost if the trend continues

Professor: We can also do something here at home
Specifically, forests in the tropics are particularly vulnerable.

But that does not rule out the fact that it also makes good sense to plant varied species when creating forests in Denmark.

Here, Jens-Christian Svenning highlights slow-growing species such as oak and beech.

- There is a tendency in commercial forestry here to plant spruce trees to get something out relatively quickly, but it is smart to plant a varied forest so that you don't only end up with the fast-growing ones, says Jens-Christian Svenning.

According to him, development can be slowed down by protecting the endangered species from logging, road construction and felling so that plantations with one tree species can be established.

- It's about both protecting them and actively considering them when planting forests, says the professor.