Carcass Black Star, the last French manufacturer of retreaded tires, is filing for bankruptcy protection.
Its takeover of the Bridgestone factory in Béthune in 2021 became a landmark case, with authorities highlighting the environmental benefits of retreaded tires. The company employs 150 people.

Black Star, which claims to be the last French manufacturer of retreaded tires and employs nearly 150 people between Isère and Pas-de-Calais, filed for bankruptcy protection on Wednesday. A hearing will be held on Friday before the Arras Commercial Court (Pas-de-Calais), according to the company's CEO, Laurent Cabassu.

The company, which took over the former Bridgestone factory in Béthune in 2021, has requested a four-month observation period, during which its shareholder Mobivia has pledged to maintain its financial support. The tire manufacturer hopes to find a buyer during this time. Several contacts have taken place in recent years, but "they haven't come to fruition" due to the company's structural deficit, according to Laurent Cabassu.

Black Star recorded a loss of €6.7 million in 2024 and then €8.5 million in 2025, despite increased revenue. The company employs around twenty people at its historic factory in Vienne (Isère) and approximately 130 in Béthune, including 40 former Bridgestone employees. The takeover of the Bridgestone factory in Béthune, which still employed 860 people when it closed in April 2021, had made it a landmark case.

Agnès Pannier-Runacher, then Minister of Industry, praised the project, saying it "laid the foundations for a remanufactured tire sector that is beneficial for the environment ." If they are not remanufactured, most end-of-life tires end up being burned.

Chinese dumping
Black Star claims that 60% of the materials in its tires produced in Béthune are recycled. However, the company currently pays €9 per used tire, or "casing," as its owner points out—a cost that is too high for the company, which sells its tires for €45 each after a lengthy retreading process. The company hopes to obtain these casings free of charge, which it then has to grind before applying a new tread and molding it.

Black Star is also suffering, according to its CEO, from the weak enforcement of a 2020 law that mandates public services to prioritize the purchase of retreaded tires. Finally, the company is, according to its CEO, a victim of "dumping" by Chinese companies, which he says is the subject of an investigation by the European Commission. However, the Commission's findings, expected by mid-2026, will not arrive in time for Black Star to recover without filing for bankruptcy protection.

