The staggering cost of PFAS in Europe revealed in an initial study
Our societies will pay dearly for the impact of perennial pollutants, these chemical substances omnipresent in water, food, and everyday objects.

A first official estimate that sends chills down your spine. Perennial pollutants ( PFAS ), these persistent chemical substances omnipresent in our daily lives, could cost the European Union up to 1.7 trillion euros by 2050, according to a report commissioned by the European Commission, published this Thursday, January 29.

This study assesses, in particular, the impacts of PFAS on human health and the costs associated with soil and water remediation, with four scenarios.

Read also
PFAS are not likely to be banned in the European Union by 2026.
According to this report, the costs of PFAS could range from €330 billion to €1.7 trillion by 2050, depending on the scope of the measures decided by the EU. Furthermore, if no action is taken against the production of these pollutants, their emissions into our environment could almost triple between 2020 and 2050, Le Monde points out .

A ban on PFAS is long overdue.
The most expensive scenario includes extensive soil remediation and wastewater treatment to ensure compliance with high environmental standards in water, for around twenty PFAS.

The most optimistic scenario, at €330 billion, corresponds to a complete halt in the production and use of PFAS, but without additional drinking water treatment or specific wastewater treatment. This would largely curb PFAS emissions in the coming years.

The authors of this study, three external consulting firms, highlight the limitations of their work, as Le Monde points out . The impact and cost to human health are undoubtedly underestimated, since exposure to only four PFAS was taken into account, while thousands exist.

From pizza boxes to clothing, the European Commission wants to ban PFAS in everyday consumer products, while providing exceptions for strategic sectors. However, its proposed legislation is not expected before the end of 2026 at the earliest, in a context marked by considerable uncertainty regarding the exemptions that certain industries might benefit from.

Risks of cancer, effects on fertility…
To legislate, Brussels must first rely on two decisive opinions from the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA): one expected in March on the risk assessment of PFAS, the other expected at the end of 2026 on the socio-economic impact of a ban in the EU.

Cosmetics, kitchen utensils, packaging… PFAS are everywhere, used for their non-stick, waterproofing, or heat-resistant properties. They also pollute our environment, from the air to the groundwater.

These per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances take an extremely long time to decompose, hence their nickname "forever pollutants ." They can also have harmful effects on health, including increased cholesterol levels and cancer risks, as well as effects on fertility and fetal development.

