Archeology "A window into what might have happened": half a billion-year-old animal species discovered in China
The fossils were unearthed in a mining quarry in Hunan province, southern China. They contained distant ancestors of worms, sponges, corals, and jellyfish.

A discovery that could shed light on a period still largely unknown to scientists. Nearly a hundred ancient marine animal species, some previously unknown, that survived a mass extinction half a billion years ago, were recently unearthed in a quarry in China . "We collected more than 50,000 fossils in a small quarry that was 12 meters high, 30 meters long, and 8 meters wide," Han Zeng of the Chinese Academy of Sciences told AFP. This site, located in Hunan province in southern China, is "extraordinary," the lead author of the article presenting these discoveries, published Wednesday, January 28, in the scientific journal Nature , declared .

In this small pit, between 2021 and 2024, researchers discovered 153 fossilized animal species, including 91 new ones. This treasure trove offers valuable insight into a mysterious episode in our planet's history: these animals lived through a period when the development of life came to an abrupt halt, the scientists explain.

Han Zeng described it as "a wonderful experience when we realized that these animals were right there on the rock." "Many of these fossils had soft parts, including gills, intestines, eyes, and even nerves ," he added.

Among the species discovered are distant ancestors of worms, sponges, corals, and jellyfish. They also unearthed numerous arthropods—a family that ranges from our modern crabs to insects—including spiny, stalked-eyed creatures called radiodontas, which were the apex predators of the time.

The animals found in the Chinese quarry are dated to approximately 512 million years ago: they thus represent the first major discovery of soft-bodied fossils that lived just after a mass extinction, known as the "Sinsk extinction." During this event, caused by a drop in the Earth's oxygen levels, nearly half of the new animals that appeared during the "big bang of evolution," about 540 million years ago, disappeared from the face of the Earth.

These fossils – dubbed “Huayuan biota” after the county where they were discovered – “ then open a window onto what may have happened” during this period, the researcher adds.

"One of the most stable environments"
Michael Lee, an evolutionary biologist at the South Australian Museum who was not involved in the research, believes the new fossils discovered in China demonstrate that the Sinsk extinction "affected shallow waters more severely." "The deep ocean is one of the most stable environments throughout geological time, in the same way that a house's basement is sheltered from seasonal changes and experiences fewer temperature fluctuations than the attic," he explains.

While the Sinsk extinction event is not one of the five mass extinctions that have marked Earth's history, Han believes there is evidence of at least 18 mass extinctions throughout the planet's history. The scientist argues for greater attention to be paid to these destructive events, especially since scientists have already warned that Earth is currently experiencing another mass extinction, this time caused by humans.