Tlaib joins Michigan clean air activists in opposing EPA efforts to roll back pollution restrictions

As President Donald Trump’s Administration works to eliminate air pollution standards put in place under former President Joe Biden, U.S. Rep. Rashida Tlaib and several climate and health activists met with reporters to lay out the costs of loosening restrictions on soot pollution.

In a Tuesday press call hosted by Michigan Clinicians for Climate Action, the Detroit Democrat and members of the American Lung Association and MI Air MI Health warned that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s move to roll back particulate matter standards defies medical science while threatening to bring further harm to communities burdened with pollution.

While former President Joe Biden’s administration announced a final rule in 2024 to strengthen regulations on particulate matter pollution, the Trump Administration revisited the standards “to aid manufacturing,” calling them “a major obstacle to permitting.”

In November, the administration filed a case with the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit asking them to vacate the final rule, which the Biden Administration estimated would prevent up to 4,500 premature deaths. The rules remain in effect until the court makes a ruling. 

Teresa Homsi, the executive director of Michigan Clinicians for Climate Action explained that particulate matter pollution is tied to several respiratory, cardiovascular and neurological issues, with pollutants making their way into the lungs and bloodstream. 

Multiple speakers argued the EPA had abandoned its mission to protect human health and the environment, with Homsi pointing to the agency’s recent decision to stop calculating how much money air pollution restrictions save in health care costs and how many deaths are prevented.

“If a standard can save thousands of lives, eliminating it amounts to letting thousands of people die,” Homsi said. “And for the EPA, that’s an uncomfortable, inconvenient truth.”

Kindra Weid, a registered nurse working in an intensive care unit in Washtenaw County, explained that these pollutants are made up of a toxic soup of vapors, gasses and particles which can damage the heart, lungs and brain. 

Short and long term exposure to soot increases the risk of heart disease and premature death from cardiovascular conditions, Weid said. It can also damage cells and tissues in the lungs, worsening conditions like asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kezia Ofosu Atta, the director of advocacy in Ohio and Michigan for the American Lung Association, noted the particular impact the rollback of these changes would have on Detroit, which the association graded a “D” for particle pollution in its 2025 State of the Air report. 

A spokesperson for the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy noted that the federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 and the State of Michigan Air Pollution Control Rules both contain laws to protect public health and the environment and that permits from the agency’s Air Quality Division, or AQD, are designed to comply with those rules.

“AQD would not issue a permit to a facility without limits and restrictions in place to protect public health and AQD’s confidence the facility would be able to comply with those limits and restrictions,” Josef Stephens, EGLE’s public information officer told the Advance in an email. “AQD permits’ staff regularly require facilities to adjust and change their original permit application submittal in order to ensure protection of public health, and in some instances AQD has denied a permit application because these concerns have not been adequately addressed.  AQD welcomes the opportunity of more resources in order to carry out our permitting and enforcement responsibilities.”

Regardless, Southwest Detroit has some of the highest levels of air pollution in the nation, largely stemming from a heavy industrial presence and emissions from vehicles. 

“I know, as a girl that grew up in southwest Detroit, how incredibly dehumanizing it felt that nobody cared about me breathing clean air,” Tlaib said. 

The 2024 final rule set a bare minimum for clean air standards, Tlaib said, and without those protections, families who live in neighborhoods near industrial facilities could see even greater harms. 

Tlaib noted that many industrial facilities in the area violate their air quality permits without being held accountable, later calling on the state to take stronger role in enforcing these permits, and for the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services to work hand in hand with the state’s Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy to determine whether a permit protects public health and the environment.



