Footage of giant snowdrifts in Japan. Snowstorm hits the country

Japan was hit by an Arctic air intrusion last week, bringing significant cold and wintry weather. The northern half of the country was also hit by a snowstorm that dumped several meters of snow over the weekend, significantly complicating transportation and daily life for residents.

The cold wave hit Japan early last week and peaked over the weekend, with storms bringing heavy snowfall to northern regions since January 21. Many places along the Sea of ​​Japan coast had received more than a meter of snow by January 26.

Sapporo, the largest city on the island of Hokkaido, was among the affected areas. Sunday's snowfall, which saw 54 centimeters (21 inches) fall in 24 hours, brought the total depth of snow to over one meter, the first time the area has seen this in several years, was a major contributor.

According to Reuters, the heavy snowfall has had a significant impact on transportation. Hundreds of train services were delayed or canceled on Sunday and most highways near Sapporo were closed. More than 7,000 passengers were forced to spend the night at the local airport as the snow paralyzed air and ground traffic.

However, the snowstorms were not limited to Hokkaido. Around the cities of Tokamachi and Uonuma on the largest island of Honshu, the snow depth is approaching two meters, more than double the long-term average.

Record 4.5 meters of snow
There was even more snow at the Sukayu Onsen spa resort, known for its extreme snow conditions. Meteorologists there recorded the heaviest January snowfall on record, with an incredible 459 centimeters of snow falling on Monday.

The extreme conditions also claimed one life in Niigata Prefecture, where a man died after falling from a roof. In other regions, authorities reported dozens of injuries during snow removal and traffic accidents, urging people to be more careful.

The snowfall gradually eased on Monday. However, frost and more, albeit less intense, precipitation are expected in the coming days. Winter weather will continue to prevail in Japan.

