Beef banned from Polytechnique Montréal menus: "This is a first in Canada, but it's not a surprise."


Thus, hamburgers were removed from the university cafeteria as part of a clearly stated sustainable development strategy.

"It is estimated that simply removing beef from the menus will reduce the carbon footprint of food services by 50%, and decrease emissions from all of Polytechnique's activities by 1%," reads a statement from the institution.

This initiative makes Polytechnique Montréal the first university in North America to ban beef from its menus, although institutions elsewhere in the world have already adopted similar measures.

"There is a movement on almost every campus in Canada that is pushing cafeterias and managers to consider ending beef. [...] They are the first in Canada, but it's not a surprise," said Sylvain Charlebois, scientific director of the agri-food analytical sciences laboratory at Dalhousie University, in an interview with Richard Martineau on QUB radio and television, broadcast simultaneously on 99.5 FM Montreal, Wednesday.

The expert also indicated that this trend is already well established in Europe and in some American states.

“There are campuses in England that have done the same thing, Cambridge, Oxford,” he listed. “There are universities in the Boston area as well. There are 35 universities in the Boston area, some of which do not allow beef or have decided to reduce beef sales for environmental reasons, of course.”

A decision that "curtails" freedom of choice
While the motivations are primarily environmental, Sylvain Charlebois also points out that eliminating beef offers financial advantages for the establishment, given the high costs associated with beef.

"When the managers saw the group of students, they were asked, 'Can we cut the meat?' They looked at their bills and said, 'OK!'" he said.

For its part, Polytechnique Montréal maintains that this decision does not lead to a reduction in the food supply for students. However, the agri-food specialist regrets that consumers' freedom of choice is not fully respected.

"The way I see the consumption of [animal] protein is with respect; we must respect people's choices, but when I see a campus decide to ban it, it's a bit like [...] not giving consumers, people, the choice to decide if they don't want certain products," he concluded.