Limestone County judge places restrictions on Belle Mina quarry as case proceeds

A Limestone county judge Friday ordered a quarry owner to make changes to address complaints from residents about noise and traffic in the area.

Limestone County Circuit Court Judge Matthew Huggins ordered the mining company, Grayson Carter & Son Contracting, Inc., to place a rock crusher used for quarry operations at least 1,200 feet away from  residents of Belle Mina and churches, plaintiffs in the case, located near the mining site.

The judge also prohibits the company from placing lights “by the line of sight over the berm” near the mine, operating in a way that creates a lot of noise in the evenings and blocking traffic with their trucks along the road.

The decision came after a lawsuit filed against the company by local residents and churches, alleging that the quarry amounts to a public and private nuisance.

“We’re very pleased the judge heard the evidence and applied the law to limit the unnecessary mayhem community members are enduring because of this nuisance,” said Sarah Stokes, a senior attorney at the Southern Environmental Law Center, in a statement from a news release published Monday. “Belle Mina residents — just like any community — are entitled to the safe, peaceful use of their homes and property. They did nothing to deserve this chaos. That’s why they intend to fight this to the end.”

Attorneys for the defendants declined comment for the article.

Brad Vice, a local resident and plaintiff in the lawsuit said in a statement in the news release that he was grateful for “this immediate relief from the nightmare we’ve been living for months.”

“I’m worried about my child’s health and my family’s well-being enduring constant noise, air pollution, and sleepless nights,” he said. “I am hopeful the court will continue to take the harm this quarry is causing seriously as we continue this fight for our rights to live a normal life on our own property.”

Nina Perez, another plaintiff who suffers from asthma and said the quarry is forcing her to move, said “no one deserves to have their lives upended because a rock quarry invaded their community.”

The order will remain in place until the court rules on the merits of the lawsuit A trial is scheduled for April, according to a news release.

Plaintiffs alleged in the lawsuit that the mine is creating dust that pollutes the air that affects their properties, generates truck traffic, produces noise and uses heavy lighting that is annoying them as the company is harvesting limestone from the site.

The plaintiffs also alleged in their request for a preliminary injunction that, because of the type of ground in the area, the mine increases the chances that sinkholes will develop.

Residents and nearby churches made largely similar arguments in the lawsuit.

Judge Huggins denied the plaintiffs’ request to stop the mine from operating altogether, saying he did not find “sufficient evidence to believe that the existence of the quarry poses an imminent or legitimate threat of subsidence or sinkhole formation.”
