tbi bank concludes a partnership with UTB Shop, the largest online store in Romania for agriculture, farm, home and garden

The need for Romanians to have quick and affordable access to equipment for agriculture, farm, home and garden has increased significantly in recent years, amid rising costs and economic pressures in rural areas and beyond. To make these purchases no longer a financial obstacle, tbi bank, one of the most important challenger banks in South-Eastern Europe, has entered into a partnership with UTB Shop, the largest online store in Romania specializing in products for agriculture, farm, home and garden.

Through this collaboration, UTB Shop customers can purchase products through the Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) solution offered by tbi bank, either in 4 interest-free installments or in 6–60 fixed installments, with advantageous interest. Thus, farmers, homeowners and small entrepreneurs can have easier access to essential equipment, machinery and products, without affecting their current budget.

The maximum amount financed can reach up to 60,000 lei, and the payment solution is available directly on the UTB Shop online platform, in a 100% digital, fast and simple process. The partnership covers the entire UTB Shop portfolio, from agricultural equipment and farm products, to home and garden items, original parts for UTB tractors and vulcanization products.

"In the current context, access to quality equipment and products for agriculture and the household is essential, but costs can represent a real barrier. Through the partnership with UTB Shop, we support farmers and households in Romania with flexible payment solutions, which allow them to invest intelligently, without financial pressure. We want to support the development of the rural environment and small businesses through simple access to financing,"  says Ionuț Sabadac, VP Merchant Solutions, tbi bank .

UTB Shop has been active on the market since 2018 and has quickly become the largest online store in Romania dedicated to agriculture, farm, home and garden. By December 2025, over 440,000 unique customers had placed 1.3 million orders, confirming the accelerated and stable evolution of the company. Most of the products sold are own brands, developed and controlled directly by UTB Shop, all available in real stock in its own warehouses in Arad, which allows fast delivery, competitive prices and total control over quality.

The UTB Shop portfolio includes over 26,000 items and serves both individuals and farmers, households, service centers, stores and a network of over 1,000 reseller partners. The platform ships, on average, approximately 2,000 orders daily and offers an optimized shopping experience, with intuitive navigation, prompt phone support and multiple payment methods.

" We want to be a real partner for farmers and homeowners in Romania, not only through competitive prices and real stocks, but also through solutions that make their purchasing decisions easier. The partnership with tbi bank allows us to offer our clients financial flexibility and faster access to the products they need, regardless of the season or the size of the investment ," says Popescu Florin, General Manager.

BNPL financing offers an affordable and convenient way to spread the cost of a purchase over fixed installments, making products more accessible to a wider range of buyers. This system allows customers to purchase more products or opt for higher value items, while retailers can better tailor their offerings to consumer needs.

tbi bank is a challenger bank in South-Eastern Europe and a regional leader in alternative payment solutions, combining financing and shopping services to meet the current needs and future consumer trends of its customers. Active in Bulgaria, Romania, Greece and Germany, tbi bank supports merchants to increase their sales and consumers to access innovative financial services, in a simple and fast digital experience. Through various digital channels and trusted partnerships with over 26,000 merchants, tbi bank has a base of over 2 million customers and has granted over 1 million loans, marking a significant increase compared to the previous year.

 In Romania, over 200,000 users constantly use the shopping application created by tbi bank to provide fast and advantageous access to the best offers, in 4 interest-free installments or up to 60 fixed installments.