Maine advances climate superfund bill that would ask fossil fuel companies to pay

Lawmakers in Maine moved forward with a climate superfund proposal that was designed to hold fossil fuel companies accountable.

On Wednesday, the Legislature’s Environment and Natural Resources Committee voted 8-4 to advance LD 1870 to the whole legislative body for a vote. It will first go to the Maine Senate. The proposal would establish a superfund for large fossil fuel companies to pay for infrastructure repairs, resiliency efforts and other costs in the rural and low-income communities disproportionately affected by flooding and other disasters.

The bill was first introduced last year, but was carried over to the current session to give time for lawsuits surrounding similar programs in other states including Vermont and New York time to play out. 

Melanie Loyzim, commissioner of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, told the committee Wednesday that she estimated it would cost $4 million to fully implement the program. She also said it would require additional staff, though the exact number would depend on the specific plan. 

Sen. Stacy Brenner (D-Cumberland) asked Loyzim how much the state has spent on storm recovery in recent years. Loyzim estimated that the state has spent $100 million in the past few years for storm recovery as well as implementing resiliency efforts, including a bipartisan climate resiliency law that passed last year. 

Pointing to that figure, some committee members argued the cost of implementation would save taxpayers money in the long term by preventing them from paying for future recovery costs. However, some Republicans said they would like to see more documentation to back up the $100 million estimate. 

Rep. Mike Soboleski (R-Phillips) and Sen. Joseph Martin (R-Oxford) questioned whether climate change is impacted by human interference, despite wide scientific consensus, arguing that the climate always varies and there have been severe weather events over the past century. They voted against the bill, expressing concern that it could lead to higher heating and gas costs. 

The vote came after advocates, as well as state and municipal leaders, held a rally at the State House Tuesday in support of the measure.

“Taxpayers in cities like mine are on the hook for tens of millions of dollars to pay for climate resilience and adaptation projects, cleaning up a mess we didn’t cause,” said Jean Guzzetti, a Bath City Councilor who helped lead the effort last fall to pass a municipal resolution to support the establishment of a Maine Climate Superfund.

Sarah Woodbury, legislative director for Maine Conservation Voters called LD 1870 “an innovative, forward-looking bill that would help futureproof our state and protect our people and communities from the impacts of climate change.”