Tropical Cyclone Luana forms into category one system off Kimberley coast

Residents in WA's West Kimberley are being warned to prepare for days of wild weather, with a tropical cyclone forming up off the region's coast.

The Bureau of Meteorology confirmed the system, known as Tropical Cyclone Luana, reached category one strength just after 2am on Saturday.

The system is forecast to strengthen to category two and make landfall over the Dampier Peninsula, about 2,200km north of Perth, around 2pm on Saturday.

Luana is expected to continue tracking south-east, passing close to Derby around 11pm before weakening to a category one system as it moves inland.

The Department of Fire and Emergency Services has issued a 'shelter now' emergency warning for residents on the Dampier Peninsula.

It is now too late for residents to leave, and they must shelter indoors in the safest part of the building and stay away from doors and windows.

Duty forecaster Catherine Schelfhout said the system was likely to bring multiple impacts as it moved through the region.

"We're expecting some very destructive wind gusts with very heavy rainfall and the potential for flooding through the West Kimberley and western parts of the Sandy Desert," she said.

"There's also the risk of a dangerous storm tide, including in Derby."

"It's been a really active start to the season. We've reached our average [number of cyclones], and we still have a couple of months to go."

Bracing for impact
Department of Fire and Emergency Services Kimberley Superintendent Leon Gardiner said additional crews were arriving ready to hit the ground running.

"We've got a number of SES volunteers arriving later this afternoon from Perth in addition to our existing emergency service volunteers from across Broome and Derby who have been working very hard behind the scenes to ensure that the community is as prepared as possible," he said.

The Bureau of Meteorology's Patch Clapp said this cyclone differed slightly from the previous one and warned residents not to get complacent.

"The thing to note with cyclones is that they're always different individuals," he said.

"So as much as we're looking at similar areas, probably a story of different impacts. 

"[Tropical Cyclone Hayley] was quite sort of contained wind and destructive winds around that northern tip of the Dampier Peninsula; with this system we're expecting to see a little bit broader in the wave effects, so probably not quite the same intensity with winds, but still significant winds."

The remote community of Ardyaloon has recorded 73mm of rain overnight with heavy rain continuing as the system moves closer to making landfall.

Second cyclone in weeks
Residents of the remote communities along the Dampier Peninsula are preparing for their second cyclone in less than a month.

The expected arrival of TC Luana, somewhere between Cape Leveque and Beagle Bay on Saturday, coincides with the ongoing clean-up from Tropical Cyclone Hayley.

Djarindjin resident Bernadette Angus was one of about 50 locals evacuating to Broome on Friday afternoon.

"The young ones can hack it, but it's dangerous here," she said.

"We hope for the best, that nothing serious happens."

Ms Angus was nervous after seeing the damage caused by Cyclone Hayley.

"We thought we'd lose our house," she said.

"It was really shocking, lucky that no-one got hurt."

Djarindjin community chief executive Nathan McIvor said the community was as prepared as it could be, given the challenging circumstances.

"It's a bit of a spin-out, really, two cyclones in less than a month," he said.

"We're still trying to get debris out of houses … around the community there's a lot of trees that were down."

Further north, Ardyaloon mother Patrina Starr, said she decided to evacuate to Broome with her children.

"I gotta take my two little ones... it's scary for the cyclone to come," she said.

Derby prepares
While the town of Derby, about 200 kilometres east of Broome, remained unscathed from Tropical Cyclone Hayley, Cylone Luana has the community on alert.

The weather bureau said higher than usual tides are likely, with flooding expected in some areas.

Sandbags had been filled for residents within the Shire of Derby/West Kimberley, as the town prepared for Cyclone Luana.

An evacuation centre at the Derby Civic Centre will open at 8am on Saturday.

Former shire president Elsia Archer has lived in Derby for almost 70 years and said it was important not to become complacent.

"In the past you can think, 'Oh, it's never going to come here', but you never know," she said.

"A few hours down the track it could all be different,

"So be prepared and do what you have to do, and listen to the authorities."

Roads closed

Cape Leveque Road, the main road up the peninsula from Broome, remains closed from McGuigan Road.

The Gibb River Road between Kimbolton Road and Pentecost River is also closed.

The Great Northern Highway between Roebuck, on the outskirts of Broome, and Willare is likely to close to all vehicles on Saturday evening.
