These producers who are switching to almonds: "There is a growing demand for healthy food."
Forced by the crisis in the wine sector or by the risks linked to limate change, producers have begun to diversify their activity by venturing into the cultivation of almond trees.

“What convinced me is that in France, only 2% of almonds consumed are locally grown. There’s a growing demand for healthy food, so I think there’s a place for French almonds,” explains Cédric Seimandi. This Provençal winegrower, who also produces olives and cereals, started cultivating almond trees last year. “I have nine hectares of almond trees; we’re just getting started. It’s a significant investment, so for now I’m not planning on expanding. Once we start producing, we might try to continue in this direction,” he explains.


He confides that he seized the opportunity to "position himself" in the production of so-called premium almonds with the help of the Compagnie des Amandes. "The market is still far from being saturated; we can make our mark," the farmer says optimistically. Through this approach, Cédric Seimandi is also reconnecting with a lost history. His city of Aix-en-Provence was, a century ago, the world capital of almonds, as evidenced by the calissons of Aix and nougat. "The almond tree is very sensitive to cold. At the time, there was no research into varieties to delay flowering, and as a result, we lost our almond orchards," he explains.

The forty-something also confided that he had been forced to diversify due to the crisis in the wine sector . "Today, we're going to draw on the resources we had set aside when things were going well. But when there's a crisis, you have to look at what's being done elsewhere," the producer explained, pleased to have "another string to [his] bow."

Adapting to climate change
Prune producer Gilles Vergnes has also embraced this diversification strategy. "We decided to try and make the most of the smaller plots of land, the hillside land," recalls the co-founder of Escoute, a company based in Lot-et-Garonne. "With climate change, prune production has become a very risky business. There are alternating seasons and a growing risk of having fewer and fewer harvests. We're in a region with mild winters, but we can still experience some frosts," he explains. To avoid the pitfalls of sub-zero temperatures confined to the lower-lying areas, his almond trees are planted at an altitude of at least 180 meters. This risk prevention strategy is vital for such a high-risk profession. "We're starting to have meetings with other producers, and we're all wondering if we'll still have plum trees in Agen in 50 years," he says, expressing his concern.