Forest fires reignite in Argentine Patagonia; more than 30,000 hectares affected
BUENOS AIRES (AP) — Some 500 firefighters were deployed to the mountainous region of Argentina's Chubut province to combat new outbreaks of the forest fire that has devoured more than 30,000 hectares of forest since December.

The Federal Emergency Agency (AFE), under the Ministry of Security, reported on Monday that some 330 specialists have joined the firefighting efforts in Los Alerces National Park, one of the epicenters of the environmental tragedy in the far south of Argentina.

The combination of high temperatures, drought attributed in part to the scant snowfall during the Southern Hemisphere winter, and abrupt wind shifts contributed to reigniting the fires affecting several towns on the Argentine side of the Patagonian Andes. No human casualties have been reported.

The fire in Los Alerces began in the first days of December due to a lightning strike and has damaged 10,000 hectares so far, according to national authorities.

However, the National Parks Administration (APN) intervened last Friday in the management of Los Alerces after the provincial government and other local organizations questioned the actions of the now displaced officials when the fire emergency broke out.

The Federal Emergency Agency (AFE) also reported that 170 firefighters are battling the flames in Puerto Patriada, a few kilometers from the Chilean border. The area burned since the beginning of January has reached 22,300 hectares.

In this case, the investigations confirmed the presence of flammable gases at the initial source of the fire. At the time the fire started, more than 3,000 tourists were staying at campsites and resorts in the area.

The Federal Emergency Agency (AFE) reported on Monday four other fire outbreaks in other locations in southern Argentina, although most are under control.

While there have been no fatalities so far, the fires destroyed homes, sheds, machinery, and agricultural crops. Grazing animals, water reservoirs, and a variety of native coniferous and forest vegetation were also damaged.

In neighboring Chile, the fires have been less merciful. The devastating fires that affected the center and south of the South American country have devoured more than 40,000 hectares and left at least 20 dead, some 300 injured, and tens of thousands evacuated.