Artificial forest and art life brought doomsday four seconds closer
Metaphorically speaking, humanity is now 85 seconds away from the end of the world, a global panel of experts says in its annual report . The so-called doomsday clock has been pushed back four seconds towards midnight by artificial intelligence, synthetic organisms, and the politics of major powers.

Every year, a group of experts assesses the state of the world using a metaphorical doomsday clock. According to the latest estimate, humanity is now 85 seconds away from midnight, or global catastrophe. It's the most ominous reading in the history of the endeavor, reports Live Science .

According to the expert group, humanity is increasing the risk of catastrophe by developing nuclear weapons, failing to address climate change and rushing to introduce artificial intelligence. In their latest report, they call humanity's current course unsustainable. They also call on world leaders, led by the United States, Russia and China, to find solutions to save the situation.

The expert group that is moving the doomsday clock operates under the umbrella of the non-profit journal Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, which was founded in 1945 by scientists from the US Manhattan Project with the aim of warning the world of the threat of nuclear war. 

Nuclear escalation

One reason the panel of experts set the doomsday clock was the desire of the major nuclear powers to escalate the geopolitical confrontation. According to experts, the competition between the world's great powers has escalated into a full-fledged arms race. This is evidenced by China's ever-growing number of nuclear warheads and platforms, as well as the decision of the US, Russia and China to modernize the delivery systems of their nuclear arsenals. 

The authors also condemned the lack of international cooperation to eliminate nuclear weapons in the new report. The latest nuclear arms reduction treaty, New START, signed between the United States and Russia in 2010, expires on February 5 this year. According to the expert panel, this will also bring to an end the nearly 60-year effort to control competition between the two largest nuclear powers. The current US administration may also consider continuing with nuclear weapons tests. 

Against the backdrop of nuclear conflict, climate change is gaining momentum on Earth, which the world's countries have also failed to control, according to the expert panel. Rather, the authors of the report assess the steps taken so far as destructive: plans to abandon fossil fuels have not been adhered to, and the Trump administration has instead attacked renewable energy technology.

Artificial forest and so-called mirror life

Building on the themes of last year's report, the panel of experts also warned against unregulated new technologies. They highlighted the possibility of creating mirror organisms as a particular danger. Such chemically created synthetic life would be a "mirror" of life that evolved on Earth on a molecular level. 

Experts fear that such mirror organisms could take over the ecological niches of Earth's natural microbes and other organisms. They also fear that the immune system will fail to protect organisms from mirror organisms, potentially triggering deadly pandemics. 

The authors point to artificial intelligence as another threat. First, it can rapidly propagate disinformation. Second, countries are increasingly using it for their national defense. According to experts, there is no easy solution to any of these concerns. Similarly, the growth of autocratic rule around the world is hindering the ability to address all of the crises outlined in the report.