Climate: around thirty companies are responsible for half of greenhouse gas emissions
Thirty-two companies in the fossil fuel sector are responsible for half of global greenhouse gas emissions. Among them are giants such as the American companies Chevron and Exxon, and the British company BP, but also public companies: in fact, it is the latter that occupy the majority of the top of the ranking.
The use of oil, gas, and coal is by far the leading cause of global warming.  This report from the research group Carbon Majors illustrates how the activities of a handful of companies are responsible.

Thus, 32 oil and gas companies are responsible for half of global emissions. These are state-owned companies, which top a list largely dominated by the Saudi national company Aramco, followed by Russia's Gazprom and the Iranian National Oil Company.

In the top 20, 17 companies are funded by public funds.
Seventeen of these companies, financed by public funds, are among the top 20 largest emitters of greenhouse gases. Unsurprisingly, they are controlled by the countries most hostile to the gradual phase-out of fossil fuels, which was widely discussed at the last COP30 climate conference, held in Brazil in November 2025: Saudi Arabia, Russia and Iran, of course, but also China, India, and the United Arab Emirates. 
Following a landmark advisory opinion issued by the International Court of Justice last summer, the world's highest court legally established the link between fossil fuel production and climate change and its consequences. These are activities for which the states concerned could therefore be held accountable in the future.

In wealthy countries, the fight against greenhouse gas emissions is losing momentum. In France and Germany, emissions reductions stalled again in 2025, and in the United States, a surge in coal-fired power plants caused the country's carbon footprint to rise again, erasing years of progress. There is no indication that 2026 will break with this trend.