‘Tough time’: Heartbreak as 20,000 livestock, wildlife killed in Victorian bushfires
Victoria is continuing to battle several out-of-control bushfires across the state, which has claimed the lives of tens of thousands of animals.

Bushfires have torn through more than 400,000 hectares of Victoria’s landscape over the past two weeks, forcing residents to flee their homes as they battle to contain the blazes.

There are 11 bushfires still burning across the state, destroying about 260 homes and 900 structures.

While the conditions have eased across the state and resident slowly begin the return to their properties, farmers are reeling from the devastating loss of their livestock and wildlife.
Tens of thousands of livestock dead

According to the Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF), about 20,000 livestock, including sheep and cattle, have died in the fires.

A spokesman said while it was too early to confirm, about 1000 farms have been affected by the fires.

Speaking to NewsWire, University of Melbourne agroecologist Danica Parnell said this figure is almost certainly expected to increase.

“This number isn’t final and will likely rise as more producers gain access to their farms,” she said.

“These fires have scattered mobs (of sheep), and left survivors exposed to smoke inhalation, burns, dehydration, and starvation on ash-covered ground.”
The 2026 bushfires have already claimed more livestock than in the 2019 and 2020 bushfire season, which Dr Parnell argued could be driven by the lower-than-average rainfall recorded last year.

“Victoria’s 2019-2020 bushfires which burnt broader east cost areas, claimed 6800 livestock,” Dr Parnell explained.

“Last year’s rainfall was only about 60-70 per cent of the long term annual average (~380mm vs. 550-650mm) based on data from the Bureau of Meteorology.

“The critically dry spring and summer months were far below normal, effectively priming pastures to burn fast and delay recovery.”
As far as the death toll of native animals, the figure is far harder to determine.

Unfortunately, there is no indication of the number of native animals killed during the bushfires, as large parts of the grounds remain inaccessible.

“We understand the concern members of the public have in relation to wildlife impacted by these fires,” Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action wildlife emergency duty officer Rodney Vile said.
“It is too early to understand the full impact of these bushfires on wildlife, members of the public should follow all advice issued by emergency services and not enter foregrounds.”

DEECA have encouraged anyone who finds wildlife or animals roaming around bushfire-affected areas to contact authorities.

“Following a fire, it is expected that injured and uninjured wildlife will be seen moving through and near the fire ground,” they said.

“If you find an injured animal impacted by a bushfire, report it to DEECA by calling 136 186.”

Fire isn’t the only danger during summer

It’s not just the fires that poise a serious threat to the live of native animals, livestock and pets during bushfire season.
“Heat stress has an impact on animal welfare and productivity, especially as paddocks have been burnt, and shade and freshwater is limited,” Dr Parnell said.

“With large areas of grazing country now damaged, stock may face short feed supply and exposure to ash, dust, and smoke.”

Dr Parnell urged producers and volunteers to monitor for signs of extreme heat stress, which may prevent further deaths and injuries.

“Right now, producers or volunteers who may be helping should continue to monitor for behavioural signs of heat stress – rapid open-mouth panting, restlessness, more standing or shade seeking behaviours, reduced eating, drooling, and lethargy,” she said.

“These indicate signs animals are struggling to cool down.

“The priority is to keep them hydrated as best as possible with clean water, providing any available shade or shelter, and supplementing feed where pasture is lost with hay, silage, or grain.

“Keep livestock off burnt areas until no smoke or heat lingers, as hot ash, embers, and dry or scorched soils can cause lameness or injury.”
Preparing for more extreme conditions

RSPCA Victoria head of prevention Rebecca Cook told NewsWire planning for emergencies was an important part of living in Victoria.

“We’re urging everyone to make sure their pets are included in their Fire Ready plans in place ahead of what could be a very dangerous fire season this year,” she said.

“An emergency kit with medication, photos or scans on your phone of important documents like vaccination certifications, and updated contact details on microchips and collars, are just some of the items to prepare in advance.”
How to support farmers and animals during bushfire season

It’s easy to feel helpless as the bushfires and extreme heat claim the lives of livestock and native animals, which puts extra pressure on farmers, producers and volunteers.

“The continuing heat and current fire conditions are placing extreme pressure on livestock and the producers who care for them,” Dr Parnell said.

She urged people living in regional and metro areas to volunteer for groups that assist in the recovery. or donate funds and fodder to help farmers get back on their feet.

Dr Parnell said the response to the bushfires was inspiring.

“It’s been incredible seeing how quickly our rural community has banded together at a time like this,” she said.

“It is a tough time, but it’s proven Australians are tougher.”