'Cosmic clock' reveals Australian landscapes' history and potential future
Curtin University researchers have demonstrated a new way to uncover the ancient history of Australia's landscapes, which could offer crucial insights into how our environment responds to geological processes and climate change and even where deposits of valuable minerals may be found.
The international team led by Curtin's Timescales of Mineral Systems Group at the School of Earth and Planetary Sciences, in cooperation with the University of Göttingen and the University of Cologne, studied tiny crystals of zircon found in ancient beach sands.

Their paper, "Ancient landscape evolution tracked through cosmogenic krypton in detrital zircon," is published in PNAS.

Zircon is one of the toughest minerals on Earth and can survive weathering, erosion and long journeys through rivers and coastlines over millions of years.

Trapped inside zircon grains is a rare gas called krypton, which is created when minerals are exposed at Earth's surface and hit by cosmic rays (high-energy, charged subatomic particles from space).

By measuring the krypton, the team was able to work out how long zircon grains spent near Earth's surface before they were buried, like a 'cosmic clock' offering a window into the past to see how quickly or slowly the ancient landscape eroded and shifted over vast periods of time.

Lead author and Adjunct Curtin Research Fellow Dr. Maximilian Dröllner, also from the University of Göttingen, said this approach allowed scientists to study landscapes far older than previously possible, which could provide valuable insight into how Earth's surface may respond to ongoing climate and tectonic change.
"Our planet's history shows climate and tectonic forces can control how landscapes behave over very long timescales," Dr. Dröllner said.

"This research helps us understand what happens when sea levels change and how deep-seated Earth movements influence the evolution of landscapes."

The findings show when landscapes are tectonically stable and sea levels remain high, erosion slows dramatically and sediments can remain stored and reworked near the surface for millions of years.

Co-author and Timescales of Mineral Systems Group lead Professor Chris Kirkland, said this has relevance for understanding the evolution of the surface of the planet over billions of years, but also future societal planning and land management.

"As we modify natural systems, we can expect changes in how sediment is stored in river basins and along coastlines and continental shelves," Professor Kirkland said.

"Our results show that these processes can fundamentally reshape landscapes, not just coastlines, over time."

Co-author, Associate Professor Milo Barham, also from the Timescales of Mineral Systems Group, said the study also had important implications for Australia's mineral resources.

"Climate doesn't just influence ecosystems and weather patterns, it also controls where mineral resources end up and how accessible they become," Associate Professor Barham said.

"Extended periods of sediment storage allow durable minerals to gradually concentrate while less stable materials break down, explaining why Australia hosts some of the world's most significant mineral sand deposits.

"Understanding these links is critical as demand for these minerals continues to grow, as it provides a long-term perspective that can improve models used to predict future environmental and resource outcomes arising from changes to these sediment systems."